
antenna are impedance suckers.



No Nonsense Technician Class
License Study Guide
for tests given between July 2022 and June 2026
Dan Romanchik KB6NU
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording or otherwise, without the
prior written permission of the author.
Table of Contents
What is amateur (ham) radio? 1
Electrical principles 5
Electronic components and circuits 20
Radio wave characteristics 35
Antennas and feed lines 46
Amateur radio signals 57
Amateur radio station safety 64
Station setup and operating controls 73
Station equipment 80
Operating procedures 89
Rules and regulations 104
Glossary 120
About the Author 123
What is amateur (ham) radio?
Amateur radio, also known as ham radio, is a hobby enjoyed by hundreds of thousands of Americans
and millions around the world. They enjoy communicating with one another via two-way radios and
experimenting with antennas and electronic circuits.
All kinds of people are amateur radio operators, also known as “hams.” Hams are young, old, men,
women, boys and girls. Kids as young as seven years old have gotten amateur radio licenses, and many
hams are active into their eighties and beyond. You never know who you'll run into on the amateur
radio bands: young and old, teachers and students, engineers and scientists, doctors and nurses,
mechanics and technicians, kings and entertainers.
For example, did you know that most of the astronauts sent up to the International Space Station (ISS)
in the last five to ten years have been licensed radio amateurs? They use the amateur radio station on
board the ISS to communicate with school groups all over the world as they are flying over.
How do you get into amateur radio?
With just a little study, you can learn all you need to know to get a Technician Class license, which is
the license class designed for beginners. To get a Technician Class license, you must take a test with 35
multiple-choice questions and answer 26 questions correctly. The test covers basic regulations, operating
practices, and electrical and electronics theory.
Knowing Morse Code is no longer required to get this license, nor any class of license. Technician Class
licensees have all amateur radio privileges above 30 MHz, including the very popular 2-meter band.
Technicians can also operate Morse Code (CW) on portions of the 80m, 40m, 15m, and 10m bands,
and voice and digital modes on portions of the 10m band.
There are two other license classes: the General Class license and the Amateur Extra Class license. To
get a General Class license, you must pass another 35-question test; the Amateur Extra Class test has 50
questions. The tests are progressively more difficult.
General Class licensees get phone and digital mode privileges on portions of the 160m, 80m, 60m,
40m, 20m, 17m, 15m, 12m, and 10m bands. They can also operate CW and digital modes on the 30m
band. Amateur Extra licensees have all amateur privileges.
How much does it cost?
Basic study materials, such as this study guide, can be had for free, and the license exam fee will be $15
or less. Once you have your first license, most hams find it best to start with simple equipment and
grow over time. A handheld VHF FM transceiver can be purchased for less than $100 new, and
excellent used equipment is often available at low prices. All things considered, the cost to get the first
license and radio should be less than $200.
1
Where do I take the test?
Amateur radio license examinations are given by Volunteer Examiners, or VEs. VEs are licensed radio
amateurs who have been trained to administer amateur radio tests. To find out when the VEs in your
area will be giving the test, go to the American Radio Relay League's (ARRL) website:
http://www.arrl.org/find-an-amateur-radio-license-exam-session. Using that page, you will be able to
search for test sessions that are close to you. If you do not have access to the Internet, you can phone
the ARRL at 860-594-0200.
Can I really learn how to be an amateur radio operator from a study
guide like this?
Yes and no. This manual will help you get your license, but getting your license is only the beginning.
There is still much to learn, and to get the most out of amateur radio, you will have to continually learn
new things.
This study guide will teach you the answers to the test questions, but will not give you a deep
understanding of electronics, radio, or the rules and regulations. That will be up to you after you get
your license.
I hope that, by helping you get your license, this guide will encourage you to become an active radio
amateur and get on the air, participate in public service and emergency communications, join an
amateur radio club, and experiment with radios, antennas, and circuits. These are the activities that will
really help you learn about radio in depth, and in the end, help you be confident in your abilities as an
amateur radio operator.
How do I use this study guide?
First, read through the study guide and then take some practice tests. In this version of the study guide,
question and the correct answers are in bold-face type. The incorrect answers have been grayed out. You
can take practice tests by going to the following websites:
• AA9PW.com
• QRZ.com/hamtest/
• eHam.net/exams/ (http://eham.net/exams/)
• HamExam.org (http://hamexam.org)
• HamStudy.org (http://hamstudy.org)
There are also ham test apps for both iOS and Android tablets:
• iOS:
◦ Amateur Radio Exam Prep (https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/amateur-radio-exam- prep-
technician/id297951496?mt=8). $4.99
2
◦ Ham Radio Exam (https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ham-radio-exam- tech/id601991935?
mt=8). FREE.
• Android:
◦ Ham Radio Study (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tango11.hamstudy)
◦ Ham Test Prep (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?
id=com.iversoft.ham.test.prep&hl=en)
Many of the questions use terms with which you may be unfamiliar. In the glossary, you will find
definitions of those terms. Please refer to the glossary if you are unsure of the meaning of an acronym.
Good luck and have fun
I hope that you find this study guide useful and that you’ll become a radio amateur. Remember that
getting your license is just a start and that you will continue to learn new things.
If you have any comments, questions, compliments or complaints, I want to hear from you. E-mail me
at cwgeek@kb6nu.com. My goal is to continually refine and improve this study guide.
73!
Dan Romanchik KB6NU
3
Electrical principles
Units and terms: current, voltage, and resistance; alternating and direct
current; conductors and insulators
Figure 1 shows a simple electric circuit. It consists of a voltage source (in this case a battery, labeled V),
a resistor (labeled R), and some wires to connect the battery to the resistor. When connected in this
way, the voltage across the battery will cause a current (labeled I) to flow through the circuit. Voltage
(V), current (I), and resistance (R) are the three basic parameters of an electric circuit.
Voltage is the force that causes electrons to flow in a circuit. Voltage is measured in volts, and we use
the letter V to represent both the force and the units.
T5A05
What is the electrical term for the force that causes electron flow?
A. Voltage
B. Ampere-hours
C. Capacitance
D. Inductance
We sometimes call voltage electromotive force or electric potential and use the letter E to represent this
quantity. Both electromotive force and electric potential are measured in volts.
4
Figure 1. A simple electric circuit.
Current is the flow of electrons in a circuit. In Figure 1, the letter I stands for current. Current flows
from the positive (+) terminal of the voltage source through the circuit to the negative terminal of the
voltage source. Current is measured in amperes, and we use the letter A to stand for amperes.
T5A03
What is the name for the flow of electrons in an electric circuit?
A. Voltage
B. Resistance
C. Capacitance
D. Current
T5A01
Electrical current is measured in which of the following units?
A. Volts
B. Watts
C. Ohms
D. Amperes
Because the polarity of the battery voltage in the circuit never changes, the current will flow in only one
direction through the circuit. We call this direct current, or DC. Batteries supply direct current, or
simply, DC.
The type of current you get out of a wall socket is different from the current that you get from a battery.
We call it alternating current, or AC, because the voltage and current are constantly changing. Figure 2
shows how the voltage of an alternating current waveform changes with time. For this particular
waveform, the voltage starts at 0 V, increases to a positive peak voltage, then decreases to a negative
peak voltage, and then begins increasing again, until it once again reaches 0 V. When the voltage is
positive, the current flows in the positive direction, and when the voltage is negative the current flows
in the negative direction. This process repeats over and over.
5
Figure 2. An alternating current (AC) waveform.
T5A09
Which of the following describes alternating current?
A. Current that alternates between a positive direction and zero
B. Current that alternates between a negative direction and zero
C. Current that alternates between positive and negative directions
D. All these answers are correct
One of the most important parameters of an alternating current is its frequency. The frequency of an
alternating current is the number of times per second that an alternating current makes a complete
cycle, where a cycle is the portion of an alternating current waveform that repeats over and over. See
Figure 2.
The frequency of the alternating current that you get from a wall socket in your home is 60 cycles per
second, or in engineering terms, 60 hertz (Hz). 1 Hz is equal to one cycle per second.
T5A12
What describes the number of times per second that an alternating current makes a
complete cycle?
A. Pulse rate
B. Speed
C. Wavelength
D. Frequency
T5A06
What is the unit of frequency?
A. Hertz
B. Henry
C. Farad
D. Tesla
Resistance is the third basic parameter of an electric circuit. As the name implies, resistance opposes the
flow of current in a circuit. The higher the resistance, the smaller the current, for a given voltage. This
applies to direct current, alternating current, and RF current, which is alternating current with a high
frequency. We use the letter R to stand for resistance. Resistance is measured in ohms, and we use the
Greek letter omega ( ) to stand for ohms.Ω
T5A04
What are the units of electrical resistance?
A. Siemens
B. Mhos
C. Ohms
D. Coulombs
T5A11
What type of current flow is opposed by resistance?
A. Direct current
B. Alternating current
C. RF current
D. All these choices are correct
6
To connect components in an electric circuit, we generally use metal wires because they conduct
electrical current well or, in other words, have a low resistance. Metals generally are good conductors
because they have many free electrons, and as a result offer low resistance to current flow. Copper is
generally the conductor of choice for electronic cables and circuits because it offers good conductivity
and costs less than silver or gold.
T5A07
Why are metals generally good conductors of electricity?
A. They have relatively high density
B. They have many free electrons
C. They have many free protons
D. All these choices are correct
Many times we need a material that does not conduct current very well. We call these materials
insulators, and insulators have a high resistance. Plastics and glass are commonly used insulators.
T5A08
Which of the following is a good electrical insulator?
A. Copper
B. Glass
C. Aluminum
D. Mercury
7
Ohm’s Law: formulas and usage
Hams obey Ohm’s Law!
Ohm’s Law is the relationship between voltage, current, and resistance in an electrical circuit. When
you know any two of these values, you can calculate the third.
The most basic equation for Ohm’s Law is E = I × R. In other words, when you know the current (I)
flowing through a circuit and the resistance (R) of the circuit, you can calculate the voltage (E) across
the circuit by multiplying these two values.
T5D02
What formula is used to calculate voltage in a circuit?
A. E = I x R
B. E = I / R
C. E = I + R
D. E = I - R
Using simple algebra, you can derive the other two forms of this equation: R = E / I and I = E / R.
These two equations let you calculate the resistance in a circuit if you know the voltage and current or
the current in a circuit if you know the voltage and resistance.
T5D03
What formula is used to calculate resistance in a circuit?
A. R = E x I
B. R = E / I
C. R = E + I
D. R = E – I
T5D01
What formula is used to calculate current in a circuit?
A. I = E  R
B. I = E / R
C. I = E + R
D. I = E - R
Now, let’s look at some examples of how to apply Ohm’s Law.
T5D04
What is the resistance of a circuit in which a current of 3 amperes flows when
connected to 90 volts?
A. 3 ohms
B. 30 ohms
C. 93 ohms
D. 270 ohms
Here’s how to calculate this answer: R = E / I = 90 volts / 3 amperes = 30 ohms.
8
T5D05
What is the resistance of a circuit for which the applied voltage is 12 volts and the
current flow is 1.5 amperes?
A. 18 ohms
B. 0.125 ohms
C. 8 ohms
D. 13.5 ohms
R = E / I = 12 volts / 1.5 amperes = 8 ohms.
T5D06
What is the resistance of a circuit that draws 4 amperes from a 12-volt source?
A. 3 ohms
B. 16 ohms
C. 48 ohms
D. 8 ohms
R = E / I = 12 volts / 4 amperes = 3 ohms.
Now, let's look at another form of the Ohm's Law equation, I = E / R to calculate the current in a
circuit.
T5D07
What is the current in a circuit with an applied voltage of 120 volts and a resistance of
80 ohms?
A. 9600 amperes
B. 200 amperes
C. 0.667 amperes
D. 1.5 amperes
I = E / R = 120 volts / 80 ohms = 1.5 amperes.
T5D08
What is the current through a 100-ohm resistor connected across 200 volts?
A. 20,000 amperes
B. 0.5 amperes
C. 2 amperes
D. 100 amperes
I = E / R = 200 volts / 100 ohms = 2 amperes.
T5D09
What is the current through a 24-ohm resistor connected across 240 volts?
A. 24,000 amperes
B. 0.1 amperes
C. 10 amperes
D. 216 amperes
I = E / R = 240 volts / 24 ohms = 10 amperes.
9
Now, let's look at the third form of the Ohm's Law equation, E = I × R to calculate the voltage across a
circuit.
T5D10
What is the voltage across a 2-ohm resistor if a current of 0.5 amperes flows through
it?
A. 1 volt
B. 0.25 volts
C. 2.5 volts
D. 1.5 volts
E = I × R = 0.5 amperes × 2 ohms = 1 volt.
T5D11
What is the voltage across a 10-ohm resistor if a current of 1 ampere flows through it?
A. 1 volt
B. 10 volts
C. 11 volts
D. 9 volts
E = I × R = 1 amperes × 10 ohms = 10 volts.
T5D12
What is the voltage across a 10-ohm resistor if a current of 2 amperes flows through it?
A. 8 volts
B. 0.2 volts
C. 12 volts
D. 20 volts
E = I × R = 2 amperes × 10 ohms = 20 volts.
10
Series and parallel circuits
Now, let’s consider circuits with two resistors instead of just a single resistor. There are two ways in
which the two resistors can be connected: in series or in parallel. Figure 3 shows a series circuit.
The current I flows through both resistors because there is only one path for the current to flow. If
R1 = R2, then the voltage will be the same across both resistors, because the same current flows
through both resistors. If R1 does not equal R2, however, the voltages will be different. In either
case, the sum of the two voltages will equal the voltage of the voltage source.
T5D13
In which type of circuit is DC current the same through all components?
A. Series
B. Parallel
C. Resonant
D. Branch
11
Figure 3. A series circuit.
In a parallel circuit, shown in Figure 4, both resistors are connected directly to the voltage source.
Because both components are connected directly to the voltage source, the voltage across them will be
the same. This voltage will cause currents to flow in each of the resistors. I1 = E/R1, and I2 = E/R2. The
total current, I, is equal to I1 + I2. If R1 = R2, then the same current flows through both resistors. If
the resistors have different values, then I1 will be different from I2.
T5D14
In which type of circuit is voltage the same across all components?
A. Series
B. Parallel
C. Resonant
D. Branch
12
Figure 4. A parallel circuit.
DC power
Power is the rate at which electrical energy is generated or used. Power is measured in watts. We use the
letter P to stand for power and the letter W to stand for watts.
T5A10
Which term describes the rate at which electrical energy is used?
A. Resistance
B. Current
C. Power
D. Voltage
T5A02
Electrical power is measured in which of the following units?
A. Volts
B. Watts
C. Watt-hours
D. Amperes
To calculate power, we multiply the voltage across a circuit by the current flowing through the circuit.
We write this equation P = E × I.
T5C08
What is the formula used to calculate electrical power (P) in a DC circuit?
A. P = E  I
B. P = E / I
C. P = E – I
D. P = E + I
Here are some examples:
T5C09
How much power is delivered by a voltage of 13.8 volts DC and a current of 10
amperes?
A. 138 watts
B. 0.7 watts
C. 23.8 watts
D. 3.8 watts
The calculation for this question is P = E × I = 13.8 V × 10 A = 138 W.
T5C10
How much power is delivered by a voltage of 12 volts DC and a current of 2.5
amperes?
A. 4.8 watts
B. 30 watts
C. 14.5 watts
D. 0.208 watts
The calculation for this question is P = E × I = 12 V × 2.5 A = 30 W.
Just as with Ohm’s Law, you can use algebra to come up with other forms of this equation to calculate
13
the voltage if you know the power and the current, or to calculate the current if you know the power
and the voltage. The formula to calculate the current, if you know the power and the voltage, is I = P /
E.
T5C11
How much current is required to deliver 120 watts at a voltage of 12 volts DC?
A. 0.1 amperes
B. 10 amperes
C. 12 amperes
D. 132 amperes
The calculation for this question is I = P / E = 120 W / 12 V = 10 A.
14
Math for electronics and conversion of electrical units
When dealing with electrical parameters such as voltage, resistance, current, and power, we use a set of
prefixes to denote various orders of magnitude:
• milli- is the prefix used to denote 1 one-thousandth of a quantity. A milliampere, for example, is
1 one-thousandth of an ampere, or 0.001 A. Often, the letter m is used instead of the prefix
milli-. 1 milliampere is, therefore, 1 mA.
• micro- is the prefix used to denote 1 one-millionth of a quantity. A microvolt, for example, is 1
one-millionth of a volt, or 0.000001 V. Often, you will see the Greek letter mu, or , used toμ
denote the prefix micro-. 1 microvolt is, therefore, 1 V.μ
• pico- is the prefix used to denote 1 one-trillionth of a quantity. A picovolt is 1 one-trillionth of
a volt, or 0.000001 V.μ
• kilo- is the prefix used to denote 1 thousand of a quantity. A kilovolt, for example, is 1000
volts. Often, the letter k is used instead of the prefix kilo-. 1 kilovolt is, therefore, 1 kV.
• mega- is the prefix used to denote 1 million of a quantity. A megahertz, for example, is 1
million Hertz. Often, the letter M is used instead of the prefix mega-. 1 megahertz is, therefore,
1 MHz.
• giga - is the prefix used to denote one billion of a quantity. One gigahertz, or 1 GHz, for
example is 1 billion Hertz.
Prefix Abbreviation Numerical Exponential
giga- G 1,000,000,000 109
mega- M 1,000,000 106
kilo- k 1,000 103
---- ---- 1 100
milli- m 0.001 10-3
micro- ,uμ 0.000001 10-6
nano- n 0.000000001 10-9
pico- p 0.000000000001 10-12
Here are some examples:
T5B01
How many milliamperes is 1.5 amperes?
A. 15 milliamperes
B. 150 milliamperes
15
C. 1500 milliamperes
D. 15,000 milliamperes
To convert amperes to milliamperes, you multiply by 1,000.
T5B02
Which is equal to 1,500,000 hertz?
A. 1500 kHz
B. 1500 MHz
C. 15 GHz
D. 150 kHz
To convert from hertz (Hz) to kHz, you divide by 1,000.
T5B03
Which is equal to one kilovolt?
A. One one-thousandth of a volt
B. One hundred volts
C. One thousand volts
D. One million volts
T5B04
Which is equal to one microvolt?
A. One one-millionth of a volt
B. One million volts
C. One thousand kilovolts
D. One one-thousandth of a volt
To convert from kilovolts to volts, you multiply by 1,000. To convert from microvolts to volts, you
divide by one million.
T5B05
Which is equal to 500 milliwatts?
A. 0.02 watts
B. 0.5 watts
C. 5 watts
D. 50 watts
To convert from milliwatts to watts, you divide by 1,000. 500 / 1000 = ½ or 0.5.
T5B06
Which is equal to 3000 milliamperes?
A. 0.003 amperes
B. 0.3 amperes
C. 3,000,000 amperes
D. 3 amperes
There are a thousand milliamperes in an ampere, so to convert from milliamperes to amperes, you
divide by 1,000.
T5C13
16
What is the abbreviation for kilohertz?
A. KHZ
B. khz
C. khZ
D. kHz
1 kHz is 1,000 Hz or 1,000 cycles per second. Note that the “H” in Hz is capitalized. 1,000,000 cycles
per second is 1,000 kHz, or 1 MHz.
T5C07
What is the abbreviation for megahertz?
A. MH
B. mh
C. Mhz
D. MHz
T5B07
Which is equal to 3.525 MHz?
A. 0.003525 kHz
B. 35.25 kHz
C. 3525 kHz
D. 3,525,000 kHz
T5B12
Which is equal to 28400 kHz?
A. 28.400 kHz
B. 2.800 MHz
C. 284.00 MHz
D. 28.400 MHz
T5B13
Which is equal to 2425 MHz?
A. 0.002425 GHz
B. 24.25 GHz
C. 2.425 GHz
D. 2425 GHz
To convert from MHz to kHz, you multiply by 1,000. To convert from kHz to MHz, or to convert
from MHz to GHz, you divide by 1,000.
The farad is the unit of capacitance. There are 1 million picofarads in a microfarad.
T5B08
Which is equal to 1,000,000 picofarads?
A. 0.001 microfarads
B. 1 microfarad
C. 1000 microfarads
D. 1,000,000,000 microfarad
17
18
Decibels
When dealing with ratios—especially power ratios—we often use decibels (dB). The reason for this is
that the decibel scale is a logarithmic scale, meaning that we can talk about large ratios with relatively
small numbers. When the value is positive, it means that there is a power increase. When the value is
negative, it means that there is a power decrease.
At this point, you don’t need to know the formula used to calculate the ratio in dB, but you need to
know the ratios represented by the values 3 dB, 6 dB, and 10 dB.
T5B09
Which decibel value most closely represents a power increase from 5 watts to 10 watts?
A. 2 dB
B. 3 dB
C. 5 dB
D. 10 dB
3 dB corresponds to a ratio of 2 to 1, and because going from 5 watts to 10 watts doubles the power, we
can also say that there is a gain of 3 dB.
T5B10
Which decibel value most closely represents a power decrease from 12 watts to 3 watts?
A. -1 dB
B. -3 dB
C. -6 dB
D. -9 dB
6 dB corresponds to a ratio of 4 to 1, and a decrease in power from 12 watts to 3 watts is a ratio of 4 to
1. Because this is a power decrease, the value in dB is negative.
T5B11
Which decibel value represents a power increase from 20 watts to 200 watts?
A. 10 dB
B. 12 dB
C. 18 dB
D. 28 dB
Increasing the power from 20 watts to 200 watts is a ratio of 10 to 1, and 10 dB corresponds to a ratio
of 10 to 1.
19
Electronic components and circuits
Resistors
Resistors are components that, as the name implies, oppose the flow of current. We use them to control
how much current flows in a circuit. The higher the resistance, the lower the current.
Most resistors have a fixed value, specified in ohms, but some are designed to be variable. That is, you
can change the resistance by turning a shaft or sliding a control back and forth. Variable resistors, also
called potentiometers, are often used to allow users to adjust the way a device operates.
T6A01
What electrical component opposes the flow of current in a DC circuit?
A. Inductor
B. Resistor
C. Inverter
D. Transformer
T6A02
What type of component is often used as an adjustable volume control?
A. Fixed resistor
B. Power resistor
C. Potentiometer
D. Transformer
T6A03
What electrical parameter is controlled by a potentiometer?
A. Inductance
B. Resistance
C. Capacitance
D. Field strength
20
Capacitors
Another common electrical component is the capacitor. The most basic type of capacitor consists of two
metal plates separated by an insulator, called a dielectric. When you put a DC voltage across a
capacitor, an electric current flows into the capacitor until the voltage across the capacitor equals the
DC voltage. This puts a positive charge on one plate and a negative charge on the other, thereby
creating an electric field between the two plates.
T6A05
What type of electrical component consists of conductive surfaces separated by an
insulator?
A. Resistor
B. Potentiometer
C. Oscillator
D. Capacitor
T6A04
What electrical component stores energy in an electric field?
A. Varistor
B. Capacitor
C. Inductor
D. Diode
The capacitor stores energy in that electric field. The ability to store energy in an electric field is called
capacitance, and the unit of capacitance is called the farad.
T5C01
What describes the ability to store energy in an electric field?
A. Inductance
B. Resistance
C. Tolerance
D. Capacitance
T5C02
What is the unit of capacitance?
A. The farad
B. The ohm
C. The volt
D. The henry
21
Inductors
The third most common type of electrical component in amateur radio equipment is the inductor.
Inductors are usually small coils of wire, and when a current flows through that coil of wire, a magnetic
field is set up around the coil.
T6A07
What electrical component is typically constructed as a coil of wire?
A. Switch
B. Capacitor
C. Diode
D. Inductor
T6A06
What type of electrical component stores energy in a magnetic field?
A. Varistor
B. Capacitor
C. Inductor
D. Diode
An inductor stores energy in a magnetic field. The ability to do this is called inductance, and the unit of
inductance is the henry.
T5C03
What describes the ability to store energy in a magnetic field?
A. Admittance
B. Capacitance
C. Resistance
D. Inductance
T5C04
What is the unit of inductance?
A. The coulomb
B. The farad
C. The henry
D. The ohm
22
Batteries
We often use batteries to power our radio equipment. Some types of batteries, such as nickel-metal
hydride, lithium-ion, and lead-acid batteries, are rechargeable. Other types of batteries, such as carbon-
zinc batteries, are not.
T6A10
Which of the following battery chemistries is rechargeable?
A. Nickel-metal hydride
B. Lithium-ion
C. Lead-acid
D. All these choices are correct
T6A11
Which of the following battery chemistries is not rechargeable?
A. Nickel-cadmium
B. Carbon-zinc
C. Lead-acid
D. Lithium-ion
23
Diodes
Diodes are the most basic semiconductor component. They have only two electrodes, called the anode
and cathode, and conduct current only when it is forward biased. That is to say, diodes only conduct
current when the voltage on the anode is positive with respect to the cathode. When the diode is reverse
biased, i.e., when the voltage on the anode is negative with respect to the cathode, the diode will not
conduct current. To identify the cathode, it is often marked with a stripe.
T6B02
What electronic component allows current to flow in only one direction?
A. Resistor
B. Fuse
C. Diode
D. Driven element
T6B09
What are the names for the electrodes of a diode?
A. Plus and minus
B. Source and drain
C. Anode and cathode
D. Gate and base
T6B06
How is the cathode lead of a semiconductor diode often marked on the package?
A. With the word "cathode"
B. With a stripe
C. With the letter C
D. With the letter K
When a diode is forward-biased, and a current flows through a diode, there is a voltage drop across the
diode called the forward voltage drop. The value of the forward voltage drop is lower in some diodes
than in others. For example, the forward voltage of a germanium diode is about 0.3 V, while the
forward voltage drop in a silicon diode is about 0.7 V.
T6B01
Which is true about forward voltage drop in a diode?
A. It is lower in some diode types than in others
B. It is proportional to peak inverse voltage
C. It indicates that the diode is defective
D. It has no impact on the voltage delivered to the load
Light-emitting diodes, or LEDs, are a particular type of diode. When LEDs are forward-biased, that is
to say when DC current flows through them in the forward direction, they emit visible light, making
them useful as indicators and as part of digital readouts.
T6B07
What causes a light-emitting diode (LED) to emit light?
A. Forward DC current
B. Reverse DC current
24
C. Capacitively-coupled RF signal
D. Inductively-coupled RF signal
T6D07
Which of the following is commonly used as a visual indicator?
A. LED
B. FET
C. Zener diode
D. Bipolar transistor
25
Transistors
Transistors are semiconductor components designed to control the current flow through them. They
have three leads and one of those leads is used as the control pin. A current, in the case of the bipolar
junction transistor, or a voltage, in the case of the field effect transistor, on the control pin controls the
current flow between the two other pins.
In some circuits, the transistor is used as a switch, and the control signal simply switches the current on
and off. In other circuits, the transistor is used as an amplifier. When used as an amplifier, the current
through the transistor is proportional to the input current or voltage. The ratio of output current to
input current is called the gain of the transistor.
T6B03
Which of these components can be used as an electronic switch?
A. Varistor
B. Potentiometer
C. Transistor
D. Thermistor
T6B11
What is the term that describes a device's ability to amplify a signal?
A. Gain
B. Forward resistance
C. Forward voltage drop
D. On resistance
T6B10
Which of the following can provide power gain?
A. Transformer
B. Transistor
C. Reactor
D. Resistor
Bipolar junction transistors are transistors that consist of three regions of semiconductor material. These
regions are either P-type, which means that it has a positive net charge, or N-type, which means it has a
net negative charge. Each region has an electrode, making the transistor a device with three leads. The
names of these three electrodes are emitter, base and collector.
There are two types of bipolar junction transistors: PNP or NPN. A PNP transistor has two P layers,
with an N layer sandwiched between them. An NPN transistor has two N layers, with a P layer
sandwiched between them.
T6B04
Which of the following components can consist of three regions of semiconductor
material?
A. Alternator
B. Transistor
C. Triode
D. Pentagrid converter
26
T6B12
What are the names of the electrodes of a bipolar junction transistor?
A. Signal, bias, power
B. Emitter, base, collector
C. Input, output, supply
D. Pole one, pole two, output
Another type of transistor often found in amateur radio equipment is the field-effect transistor, or FET.
To control the flow of current through the field effect transistor, you use a voltage signal on the control
pin. This voltage sets up an electric field inside the transistor, hence the name field effect transistor.
FETs, like NPN and PNP transistors have three electrodes. These electrodes are called the gate, drain,
and source.
T6B08
What does the abbreviation FET stand for?
A. Frequency Emission Transmitter
B. Fast Electron Transistor
C. Free Electron Transmitter
D. Field Effect Transistor
T6B05
What type of transistor has a gate, drain, and source?
A. Varistor
B. Field-effect
C. Tesla-effect
D. Bipolar junction
27
Circuit diagrams, schematic symbols, component functions
Figure T-1 is a schematic diagram of a simple transistor circuit. In this circuit, the transistor
(component #2) is used as a switch that turns on a lamp (#3) when a positive voltage is applied to the
input. Applying a positive voltage to the transistor input causes a small current to flow into the base of
the transistor, which then causes the transistor to conduct a larger current to flow from the transistor’s
emitter to the collector. This current, supplied by the battery (#4), causes the lamp to glow.
T6C01
What is the name of an electrical wiring diagram that uses standard component
symbols?
A. Bill of materials
B. Connector pinout
C. Schematic
D. Flow chart
T6C12
Which of the following is accurately represented in electrical schematics?
A. Wire lengths
B. Physical appearance of components
C. Component connections
D. All these choices are correct
Figure T-1 is a schematic diagram of a simple transistor circuit. In this circuit, the transistor
(component #2) is used as a switch that turns on a lamp (#3) when a positive voltage is applied to the
input. The positive voltage on the transistor input enables the transistor to conduct current supplied by
the battery (#4) through the lamp, and the current causes the lamp to glow.
T6C02
What is component 1 in figure T-1?
A. Resistor
28
B. Transistor
C. Battery
D. Connector
T6C03
What is component 2 in figure T-1?
A. Resistor
B. Transistor
C. Indicator lamp
D. Connector
T6D10
What is the function of component 2 in figure T-1?
A. Give off light when current flows through it
B. Supply electrical energy
C. Control the flow of current
D. Convert electrical energy into radio waves
T6C04
What is component 3 in figure T-1?
A. Resistor
B. Transistor
C. Lamp
D. Ground symbol
T6C05
What is component 4 in figure T-1?
A. Resistor
B. Transistor
C. Ground symbol
D. Battery
The circuit shown in Figure T2 is a simple power supply. Component 2 is a fuse.
29
T6A12
What type of switch is represented by component 3 in figure T-2?
A. Single-pole single-throw
B. Single-pole double-throw
C. Double-pole single-throw
D. Double-pole double-throw
It turns the power supply on and off.
T6C09
What is component 4 in figure T-2?
A. Variable inductor
B. Double-pole switch
C. Potentiometer
D. Transformer
T6D06
What component changes 120 V AC power to a lower AC voltage for other uses?
A. Variable capacitor
B. Transformer
C. Transistor
D. Diode
Component 5 in Figure T2 is a diode. Diodes allow current to flow only in one direction, so it converts
the alternating current from the transformer to a varying direct current. This process of changing an
alternating current into a varying direct current signal is called rectification, and the devices or circuits
that perform rectification, such as the diode in this circuit, are called rectifiers.
T6D01
Which of the following devices or circuits changes an alternating current into a
varying direct current signal?
A. Transformer
B. Rectifier
C. Amplifier
D. Reflector
T6C06
What is component 6 in figure T-2?
A. Resistor
B. Capacitor
C. Regulator IC
D. Transistor
Sometimes, this is called a filter capacitor, and its function is to filter out remnants of the 60 Hz AC
that are part of the varying direct current signal.
T6C07
What is component 8 in figure T-2?
A. Resistor
30
B. Inductor
C. Regulator IC
D. Light emitting diode
The LED is a pilot light, serving to alert a user when the power supply is on.
T6C08
What is component 9 in figure T-2?
A. Variable capacitor
B. Variable inductor
C. Variable resistor
D. Variable transformer
Its purpose is to limit the output current of the supply.
The circuit shown in Figure T3 is a type of antenna tuner.
T6C10
What is component 3 in figure T-3?
A. Connector
B. Meter
C. Variable capacitor
D. Variable inductor
T6C11
What is component 4 in figure T-3?
A. Antenna
B. Transmitter
C. Dummy load
D. Ground
31
Resonant, or tuned, circuits
When a circuit has both inductors and capacitors, we sometimes call it a resonant, or tuned circuit. The
reason for this is that these circuits have a resonant frequency. When a capacitor and inductor are
connected in series, the circuit has a very low impedance at the resonant frequency. When the capacitor
and inductor are connected in parallel, the circuit has a very high impedance at the resonant frequency
T6D11
Which of the following is a resonant or tuned circuit?
A. An inductor and a capacitor in series or parallel
B. A linear voltage regulator
C. A resistor circuit used for reducing standing wave ratio
D. A circuit designed to provide high-fidelity audio
T6D08
Which of the following is combined with an inductor to make a resonant circuit?
A. Resistor
B. Zener diode
C. Potentiometer
D. Capacitor
32
Other components
There are many different types of components in modern radio equipment. Below, we will describe the
types of components you will need to know about to pass the Technician Class license examination.
Switches are used to open and close circuits or to switch an input or output between two or more
circuits. A single-pole, dual-throw, or SPDT, switch connects a single circuit between two other
circuits.
T6A08
What is the function of an SPDT switch?
A. A single circuit is opened or closed
B. Two circuits are opened or closed
C. A single circuit is switched between one of two other circuits
D. Two circuits are each switched between one of two other circuits
Normally, switches are manually-controlled, such as the light switch in your home. Relays, however, are
controlled electrically. Applying a voltage to the input of a relay causes its output to switch.
T6D02
What is a relay?
A. An electrically-controlled switch
B. A current controlled amplifier
C. An inverting amplifier
D. A pass transistor
Meters are devices used to indicate many different values. Meters can indicate the output voltage of a
power supply, the output power of a transmitter, and many other values.
T6D04
Which of the following displays an electrical quantity as a numeric value?
A. Potentiometer
B. Transistor
C. Meter
D. Relay
To make electronic circuits smaller, component manufacturers make devices that have many electronic
components on a single piece of silicon. We call these integrated circuits. Integrated circuits, such as
microprocessors, may have million of transistors inside them.
T6D09
What is the name of a device that combines several semiconductors and other components
into one package?
A. Transducer
B. Multi-pole relay
C. Integrated circuit
D. Transformer
Integrated circuits may perform either analog or digital functions. One type of analog integrated circuit
that is very common is the voltage regulator.
33
T6D05
What type of circuit controls the amount of voltage from a power supply?
A. Regulator
B. Oscillator
C. Filter
D. Phase inverter
Power supplies generally have one or more fuses. An output fuse, for example, will prevent a device
connected to the power supply from drawing so much current from the supply that it damages the
supply. We call this situation a current overload. The output fuse protects the power supply from
damage by breaking the connection between the power supply and the device being powered when the
current rises above a certain value.
T6A09
What electrical component is used to protect other circuit components from current
overloads?
A. Fuse
B. Thyratron
C. Varactor
D. All these choices are correct
When connecting electronic assemblies together, we often use cables with one or more conductors.
Some of those conductors may have a shield around them that is connected to ground.
T6D03
Which of the following is a reason to use shielded wire?
A. To decrease the resistance of DC power connections
B. To increase the current carrying capability of the wire
C. To prevent coupling of unwanted signals to or from the wire
D. To couple the wire to other signals
34
Radio wave characteristics
Frequency, wavelength, and the electromagnetic spectrum
Radio waves are what amateur radio is all about. Amateur radio operators generate them and send them
off into space. Then, we capture them and demodulate them.
Radio waves are also called electromagnetic waves because they consist of both an electric field and a
magnetic field. The two fields are at right angles to one another as they travel through space.
T3B03
What are the two components of a radio wave?
A. Impedance and reactance
B. Voltage and current
C. Electric and magnetic fields
D. Ionizing and non-ionizing radiation
T3B01
What is the relationship between the electric and magnetic fields of an electromagnetic
wave?
A. They travel at different speeds
B. They are in parallel
C. They revolve in opposite directions
D. They are at right angles
All electromagnetic waves, including radio waves, travel at the speed of light, or 300 million meters per
second.
T3B04
What is the velocity of a radio wave traveling through free space?
A. Speed of light
B. Speed of sound
C. Speed inversely proportional to its wavelength
D. Speed that increases as the frequency increases
T3B11
What is the approximate velocity of a radio wave in free space?
A. 150,000 meters per second
B. 300,000,000 meters per second
C. 300,000,000 miles per hour
D. 150,000 miles per hour
An important characteristic of a radio wave is its frequency, or the number of cycles per second. As
mentioned earlier, the unit of frequency is the Hertz. We abbreviate Hertz as Hz, and one Hz is one
cycle per second.
A characteristic of a radio wave that is related to frequency is its wavelength. A wavelength is the
distance that a radio wave travels during one cycle. Because radio waves travel at the speed of light, or
300,000,000 meters per second, the wavelength is 300,000,000 divided by the frequency. To make this
35
easier to calculate, you can divide both the speed of light and the frequency by one million. That makes
the equation:
wavelength (m) = 300/f (MHz)
The converse of this equation is:
f (MHz) = 300/wavelength (m)
As you can see from the equations, the lower the frequency, the longer the wavelength, and vice versa,
the higher the frequency, the shorter the wavelength.
T3B06
What is the formula for converting frequency to approximate wavelength in meters?
A. Wavelength in meters equals frequency in hertz multiplied by 300
B. Wavelength in meters equals frequency in hertz divided by 300
C. Wavelength in meters equals frequency in megahertz divided by 300
D. Wavelength in meters equals 300 divided by frequency in megahertz
T3B05
What is the relationship between wavelength and frequency?
A. Wavelength gets longer as frequency increases
B. Wavelength gets shorter as frequency increases
C. Wavelength and frequency are unrelated
D. Wavelength and frequency increase as path length increases
In amateur radio, we sometimes use the frequency and sometimes the wavelength when talking about a
radio signal. We use wavelength, for example, when we refer to the amateur radio bands. The 2 m
amateur radio band, for example, spans 144 MHz to 148 MHz. A radio wave with a frequency of 148
MHz, would have a wavelength of 2.03 meters.
T3B07
In addition to frequency, which of the following is used to identify amateur radio
bands?
A. The approximate wavelength in meters
B. Traditional letter/number designators
C. Channel numbers
D. All these choices are correct
For convenience, we split the entire range of radio frequencies into sub-ranges, including high
frequency (HF), very high frequency (VHF), and ultra high frequency (UHF).
T3B10
What frequency range is referred to as HF?
A. 300 to 3000 MHz
B. 30 to 300 MHz
C. 3 to 30 MHz
D. 300 to 3000 kHz
T3B08
What frequency range is referred to as VHF?
36
A. 30 kHz to 300 kHz
B. 30 MHz to 300 MHz
C. 300 kHz to 3000 kHz
D. 300 MHz to 3000 MHz
T3B09
What frequency range is referred to as UHF?
A. 30 to 300 kHz
B. 30 to 300 MHz
C. 300 to 3000 kHz
D. 300 to 3000 MHz
A radio signal of any frequency is called a radio frequency, or RF, signal.
T5C06
What does the abbreviation “RF” mean?
A. Radio frequency signals of all types
B. The resonant frequency of a tuned circuit
C. The real frequency transmitted as opposed to the apparent frequency
D. Reflective force in antenna transmission lines
37
Propagation modes
As amateur radio operators, we should always try to use the right frequency and the right mode when
communicating. To do this, we need to know how radio signals travel from one point to another and
what effect frequency, our antennas and even our location have on signal propagation.
Communications at VHF and UHF frequencies are generally “line-of-sight” communications. This
means they normally travel in a straight line from the transmitter to the receiver. For this reason, they
are normally used for local communications.
Because VHF and UHF signals are line-of-sight, at some distance, the signals will be blocked by the
curvature of the Earth. The maximum distance for line-of-sight communications is called the radio
horizon. The radio horizon extends somewhat farther than the visual horizon.
T3C11
Why is the radio horizon for VHF and UHF signals more distant than the visual
horizon?
A. Radio signals move somewhat faster than the speed of light
B. Radio waves are not blocked by dust particles
C. The atmosphere refracts radio waves slightly
D. Radio waves are blocked by dust particles
T3C01
Why are simplex UHF signals rarely heard beyond their radio horizon?
A. They are too weak to go very far
B. FCC regulations prohibit them from going more than 50 miles
C. UHF signals are usually not propagated by the ionosphere
D. UHF signals are absorbed by the ionospheric D region
Some signals bounce off the ionosphere. This gives them the ability to travel much further than line of
sight. We’ll talk more about the ionosphere later.
One problem often encountered when using VHF and UHF frequencies is multipath propagation.
Multipath propagation occurs when your signals arrive at a receiving station via two or more paths.
Since the signal paths may be different lengths, the signals may arrive out of phase and cancel one
another or arrive in phase and reinforce one another. Moving an antenna only a few feet, say when
you’re operating mobile, can cause the received signal strength to vary greatly.
T3A01
Why do VHF signal strengths sometimes vary greatly when the antenna is moved only
a few feet?
A. The signal path encounters different concentrations of water vapor
B. VHF ionospheric propagation is very sensitive to path length
C. Multipath propagation cancels or reinforces signals
D. All these choices are correct
This can be a real problem for mobile operation, as your transmitter and antenna location is constantly
38
changing. This means that the signal strength at the receiving station constantly changes as well. This
rapid fluctuation in received signal strength is sometimes called picket fencing.
T3A06
What is the meaning of the term “picket fencing”?
A. Alternating transmissions during a net operation
B. Rapid flutter on mobile signals due to multipath propagation
C. A type of ground system used with vertical antennas
D. Local vs long-distance communications
Because it can cause signal strength to vary greatly, multipath propagation affects both voice and digital
transmissions. Since reliable digital transmissions rely on the signals being relatively constant and
strong, multipath propagation can cause errors to occur.
T3A10
What effect does multipath propagation have on data transmissions?
A. Transmission rates must be increased by a factor equal to the number of separate paths
observed
B. Transmission rates must be decreased by a factor equal to the number of separate paths
observed
C. No significant changes will occur if the signals are transmitted using FM
D. Error rates are likely to increase
Knowing how VHF and UHF signals propagate can help you communicate even in adverse conditions.
When trying to use a repeater, for example, you may find yourself in a place where a direct path to the
repeater is not possible. If you find yourself in this situation, you could try using a directional antenna
and bounce your signal off buildings or other obstructions.
T3A05
When using a directional antenna, how might your station be able to communicate
with a distant repeater if buildings or obstructions are blocking the direct line of sight
path?
A. Change from vertical to horizontal polarization
B. Try to find a path that reflects signals to the repeater
C. Try the long path
D. Increase the antenna SWR
Another phenomenon you might use when a direct path to a repeater is not possible is “knife-edge”
diffraction. You might be able to use this phenomenon to get your signal around a building in an urban
setting or over a mountain peak in an outside setting.
T3C05
Which of the following effects may allow radio signals to travel beyond obstructions
between the transmitting and receiving stations?
A. Knife-edge diffraction
B. Faraday rotation
C. Quantum tunneling
D. Doppler shift
39
A condition that could impede the transmission of UHF and microwave signals is heavy vegetation. So,
keep your antennas out of trees or above trees.
T3A02
What is the effect of vegetation on UHF and microwave signals?
A. Knife-edge diffraction
B. Absorption
C. Amplification
D. Polarization rotation
40
Antenna polarization
Antenna polarization is important at VHF and UHF frequencies. How you mount an antenna directly
affects its polarization. When the radiating element of an antenna is vertical, the electric field will be
vertically polarized, and we say that the transmitted radio waves have a vertical polarization. When the
radiating element of an antenna is horizontal, the electric field will be horizontally polarized, and we say
that the radio waves have a horizontal polarization.
T3B02
What property of a radio wave defines its polarization?
A. The orientation of the electric field
B. The orientation of the magnetic field
C. The ratio of the energy in the magnetic field to the energy in the electric field
D. The ratio of the velocity to the wavelength
T3A04
What happens when antennas at opposite ends of a VHF or UHF line of sight radio
link are not using the same polarization?
A. The modulation sidebands might become inverted
B. Received signal strength is reduced
C. Signals have an echo effect
D. Nothing significant will happen
When using a repeater, vertical polarization is most often used. So, when using a handheld transceiver,
make sure to hold it so that your antenna is straight up and down. Different activities use different
antenna polarizations, though.
T3A03
What antenna polarization is normally used for long-distance CW and SSB contacts
on the VHF and UHF bands?
A. Right-hand circular
B. Left-hand circular
C. Horizontal
D. Vertical
The reason for this is that operators transmitting CW and SSB signals are often using what are called
beam antennas, and it’s much easier to mount and operate beam antennas horizontally than it is to
mount them vertically.
Interesting propagation phenomena
Even though VHF communications are most often line-of-sight, there are some propagation modes
that make it possible to communicate over long distances. For example, sometimes VHF signals will
bounce off the E layer of the ionosphere. This phenomenon is called “sporadic E” propagation because
it happens only sporadically.
T3C04
41
Which of the following types of propagation is most commonly associated with
occasional strong signals on the 10, 6, and 2 meter bands from beyond the radio
horizon?
A. Backscatter
B. Sporadic E
C. D region absorption
D. Gray-line propagation
Other interesting propagation phenomena at VHF frequencies include auroral backscatter, meteor
scatter, tropospheric scatter, and tropospheric ducting. Bouncing signals off the earth’s aurora is very
interesting to do, but the signals usually become distorted and signal strength can vary greatly. This is
because the aurora itself is constantly changing.
T3C03
What is a characteristic of VHF signals received via auroral backscatter?
A. They are often received from 10,000 miles or more
B. They are distorted and signal strength varies considerably
C. They occur only during winter nighttime hours
D. They are generally strongest when your antenna is aimed west
Some hams also bounce signals off meteor showers. This propagation mode is called meteor scatter.
Meteor scatter propagation is most pronounced on the 6-meter band.
T3C07
What band is best suited for communicating via meteor scatter?
A. 33 centimeters
B. 6 meters
C. 2 meters
D. 70 centimeters
One question that I often get is whether or not the weather affects radio wave propagation. The short
answer is no, but there are, of course, exceptions to this rule. One way that weather can affect radio
propagation is when there is a temperature inversion in the atmosphere. A temperature inversion occurs
when a layer of cooler air gets trapped below a layer of warmer air in the troposphere. The troposphere
is the lowest region of the atmosphere, extending from the earth’s surface to a height of about 6–10 km.
When this happens, a tropospheric duct may form. VHF signals entering this duct may propagate
through the duct for hundreds of miles.
T3C06
What type of propagation is responsible for allowing over-the-horizon VHF and UHF
communications to ranges of approximately 300 miles on a regular basis?
A. Tropospheric ducting
B. D region refraction
C. F2 region refraction
D. Faraday rotation
T3C08
What causes tropospheric ducting?
A. Discharges of lightning during electrical storms
42
B. Sunspots and solar flares
C. Updrafts from hurricanes and tornadoes
D. Temperature inversions in the atmosphere
Another exception to the rule occurs at microwave frequencies. Precipitation, including rain, snow, or
ice can absorb microwave signals, thereby decreasing range.
T3A07
What weather condition might decrease range at microwave frequencies?
A. High winds
B. Low barometric pressure
C. Precipitation
D. Colder temperatures
At lower frequencies, however, precipitation has little or no effect on propagation.
T3A12
What is the effect of fog and rain on signals in the 10 meter and 6 meter bands?
A. Absorption
B. There is little effect
C. Deflection
D. Range increase
43
HF propagation
For reliable long-distance communications, amateurs use the HF frequencies. The reason for this is that
HF signals bounce off the ionosphere. This phenomenon allows amateur radio operators to contact
other amateur radio stations around the world.
The ionosphere is created by solar radiation, which creates a high concentration of ions and free
electrons that reflect radio waves. It extends from about 50 to 600 miles above the earth’s surface. There
are three ionospheric layers—the D, E, and F layers—with the D layer being closest to the Earth, and
the F layer being the layer farthest from the surface of the Earth.
T3A11
Which region of the atmosphere can refract or bend HF and VHF radio waves?
A. The stratosphere
B. The troposphere
C. The ionosphere
D. The mesosphere
T3C02
What is a characteristic of HF communication compared with communications on
VHF and higher frequencies?
A. HF antennas are generally smaller
B. HF accommodates wider bandwidth signals
C. Long-distance ionospheric propagation is far more common on HF
D. There is less atmospheric interference (static) on HF
One interesting phenomenon that is related to HF propagation is the sunspot cycle. Generally, the
number of sunspots increases and decreases over an 11-year cycle, and HF propagation, especially on
the higher frequency HF bands, is best at times when there are many sunspots. The reason for this is
that the more sunspots there are, the more solar radiation reaches earth. This radiation increases the
amount of ionization in the ionosphere, which in turn, increases the ability of the ionosphere to reflect
radio waves.
T3C10
Which of the following bands may provide long-distance communications via the
ionosphere’s F region during the peak of the sunspot cycle?
A. 6 and 10 meters
B. 23 centimeters
C. 70 centimeters and 1.25 meters
D. All these choices are correct
Because of the way that the ionosphere changes throughout the day, propagation is best on the higher
frequency bands (10m, 15m and 20m) during the day, while propagation is best on the lower frequency
bands (160m, 80m, 40m) at night.
T3C09
What is generally the best time for long-distance 10 meter band propagation via the F
region?
A. From dawn to shortly after sunset during periods of high sunspot activity
44
B. From shortly after sunset to dawn during periods of high sunspot activity
C. From dawn to shortly after sunset during periods of low sunspot activity
D. From shortly after sunset to dawn during periods of low sunspot activity
A common phenomenon of HF signal propagation is fading.
T3A08
What is a likely cause of irregular fading of signals propagated by the ionosphere?
A. Frequency shift due to Faraday rotation
B. Interference from thunderstorms
C. Intermodulation distortion
D. Random combining of signals arriving via different paths
This is similar to multipath distortion of VHF and UHF signals, but in this case, the signals are
bouncing off the ionosphere, and because the ionosphere is constantly changing, signals fade in and out.
Antenna polarization is not as important when operating on the HF bands as it is when operating on
the VHF/UHF bands. This is because signals “skip” off the ionosphere and become neither horizontally
polarized, nor vertically polarized, but elliptically polarized.
T3A09
Which of the following results from the fact that signals propagated by the ionosphere
are elliptically polarized?
A. Digital modes are unusable
B. Either vertically or horizontally polarized antennas may be used for transmission or
reception
C. FM voice is unusable
D. Both the transmitting and receiving antennas must be of the same polarization
45
Antennas and feed lines
Antenna types
The most common, and perhaps the simplest, antenna is the half-wave dipole antenna. As the name
suggests, it measures close to one half wavelength from one end of the antenna to the other. Because
half-wave dipole antennas can be quite long—a 40m half-wave dipole antenna, for example, is about 66
feet long—they are normally mounted horizontally between two vertical supports.
T9A03
Which of the following describes a simple dipole oriented parallel to Earth's surface?
A. A ground-wave antenna
B. A horizontally polarized antenna
C. A travelling-wave antenna
D. A vertically polarized antenna
When putting up a dipole antenna, you should consider the orientation of the antenna because it
radiates better broadside to the antenna than off the ends of the antenna.
T9A10
In which direction does a half-wave dipole antenna radiate the strongest signal?
A. Equally in all directions
B. Off the ends of the antenna
C. In the direction of the feed line
D. Broadside to the antenna
So, for example, if you live in Kansas, you might want to orient the antenna so that the wire runs north
to south. The antenna will then radiate best east and west, meaning that you’ll be able to cover most of
the U.S.
The length of a dipole antenna is actually about 5% shorter than the value that you would calculate
using the formula wavelength (m) = 300 / frequency (MHz). The reason for this is that there will be
some stray capacitance between the wire and the ground and other objects near the antenna. Let’s take a
look at an example.
T9A09
What is the approximate length, in inches, of a half-wavelength 6 meter dipole
antenna?
A. 6
B. 50
C. 112
D. 236
Here’s how to make this calculation. One half wavelength is 3 m. 3 m x 39.4 in/m = 118.2 inches.
Since the length of the antenna is about 5% shorter than this calculated value, the approximate length
of the antenna will be 118.2 inches x 0.95, or about 112 inches.
Once you have built a dipole antenna, chances are it won't be resonant on the frequency you want. To
46
tune the antenna, you need to determine its resonant frequency and then make it longer or shorter. To
decrease the resonant frequency of an antenna, you lengthen it, because the wavelength is longer.
Conversely, to increase the resonant frequency, you shorten the antenna.
T9A05
Which of the following increases the resonant frequency of a dipole antenna?
A. Lengthening it
B. Inserting coils in series with radiating wires
C. Shortening it
D. Adding capacitive loading to the ends of the radiating wires
The final length will depend on the height at which you mount the antenna and any trees or buildings
that are nearby.
Perhaps the second-most popular type of amateur radio antenna is the quarter-wave vertical antenna.
The radiator of a vertical antenna is mounted perpendicular to the Earth. This makes it vertically-
polarized, because the electric field will have the same orientation as the antenna’s radiator.
Like the half-wave dipole antenna, the length of a quarter-wave vertical antenna will be about 5%
shorter than the calculated quarter wavelength.
T9A08
What is the approximate length, in inches, of a quarter-wavelength vertical antenna
for 146 MHz?
A. 112
B. 50
C. 19
D. 12
The wavelength of a 146 MHz radio wave is approximately 2 m. One quarter of a wavelength is
therefore 0.5 m. 0.5 m x 39.4 in/m = 19.7 in. 19.7 in x 0.95 ≈ 19 in.
Because full-size, half-wave or quarter-wave HF antennas can be very long, many amateurs use a
technique called “loading” to shorten them. You can use either inductors or capacitors to load an
antenna, but the most common way is to use an inductor. In either case, loading an antenna makes it
seem electrically longer to a signal at the antenna feed point.
T9A02
Which of the following describes a type of antenna loading?
A. Electrically lengthening by inserting inductors in radiating elements
B. Inserting a resistor in the radiating portion of the antenna to make it resonant
C. Installing a spring in the base of a mobile vertical antenna to make it more flexible
D. Strengthening the radiating elements of a beam antenna to better resist wind damage
While this technique does allow you to shorten an antenna, the shortened antenna will not be as
efficient as a full-size antenna.
47
Many amateurs use directional or beam antennas. Beam antennas concentrate the power that is applied
to them in one direction, thereby increasing the signal strength in that direction, when compared to a
reference antenna, such as a dipole antenna. We call this increase in signal strength antenna gain. There
are many different types of beam antennas, including the Yagi, the quad, and the dish antenna.
T9A01
What is a beam antenna?
A. An antenna built from aluminum I-beams
B. An omnidirectional antenna invented by Clarence Beam
C. An antenna that concentrates signals in one direction
D. An antenna that reverses the phase of received signals
T9A11
What is antenna gain?
A. The additional power that is added to the transmitter power
B. The additional power that is required in the antenna when transmitting on a higher
frequency
C. The increase in signal strength in a specified direction compared to a reference
antenna
D. The increase in impedance on receive or transmit compared to a reference antenna
T9A06
Which of the following types of antenna offers the greatest gain?
A. 5/8 wave vertical
B. Isotropic
C. J pole
D. Yagi
Most handheld VHF and UHF transceivers come with short, flexible antennas called “rubber duck”
antennas. These antennas use inductive loading to make them shorter than a full-sized antenna. Loading
them like this makes them less efficient than a full-sized quarter-wavelength vertical antenna.
T9A04
What is a disadvantage of the short, flexible antenna supplied with most handheld
radio transceivers, compared to a full-sized quarter-wave antenna?
A. It has low efficiency
B. It transmits only circularly polarized signals
C. It is mechanically fragile
D. All these choices are correct
This disadvantage is compounded if you try to use a handheld VHF transceiver inside a vehicle. The
shielding effect of the vehicle’s metal frame will prevent some of your signal from getting outside the
vehicle and block some of the signal from a repeater or other station from reaching the antenna inside
the vehicle.
T9A07
48
What is a disadvantage of using a handheld VHF transceiver with a flexible antenna
inside a vehicle?
A. Signal strength is reduced due to the shielding effect of the vehicle
B. The bandwidth of the antenna will decrease, increasing SWR
C. The SWR might decrease, decreasing the signal strength
D. All these choices are correct
A better option is to use an externally-mounted antenna. A popular choice for an externally-mounted
mobile antenna is the 5/8-wavelength vertical antenna. One reason that it is a popular choice, is that it
has more gain than a 1/4-wavelength antenna.
T9A12
What is an advantage of a 5/8 wavelength whip antenna for VHF or UHF mobile
service?
A. It has more gain than a 1/4-wavelength antenna
B. It radiates at a very high angle
C. It eliminates distortion caused by reflected signals
D. It has 10 times the power gain of a 1/4 wavelength whip
49
Feed lines and connectors
Feed lines connect radios to antennas. There are many different types of feed lines, including coaxial
cable, ladder line, twin lead, and open-wire feed line, but coaxial cable is the most common type.
T9B03
Why is coaxial cable the most common feed line for amateur radio antenna systems?
A. It is easy to use and requires few special installation considerations
B. It has less loss than any other type of feed line
C. It can handle more power than any other type of feed line
D. It is less expensive than any other type of feed line
Perhaps the most important consideration when choosing a feed line is the impedance of the feed line.
In general, you should match the impedance of the feed line to the output impedance of the transmitter
and the input impedance of the antenna.
T5C12
What is impedance?
A. The opposition to AC current flow
B. The inverse of resistance
C. The Q or Quality Factor of a component
D. The power handling capability of a component
T5C05
What is the unit of impedance?
A. The volt
B. The ampere
C. The coulomb
D. The ohm
Most amateur radio transmitters have an output impedance of 50 ohms, and most antennas have an
input impedance close to 50 ohms. Because this is the case, most coaxial cable used in amateur radio
stations has an impedance of 50 ohms.
T9B02
What is the most common impedance of coaxial cables used in amateur radio?
A. 8 ohms
B. 50 ohms
C. 600 ohms
D. 12 ohms
RG-58 and RG-213 are two types of coaxial cable often used in amateur radio stations. Both have an
impedance of 50 ohms.
Despite being the most popular type of feedline for amateur radio stations, coaxial cable does have some
disadvantages. One of them is that it may be lossy at high frequencies. Some coax cable types have more
50
loss than others.
T9B05
What happens as the frequency of a signal in coaxial cable is increased?
A. The characteristic impedance decreases
B. The loss decreases
C. The characteristic impedance increases
D. The loss increases
T9B10
What is the electrical difference between RG-58 and RG-213 coaxial cable?
A. There is no significant difference between the two types
B. RG-58 cable has two shields
C. RG-213 cable has less loss at a given frequency
D. RG-58 cable can handle higher power levels
What this means in practice is that using RG-58 coax as the feed line for an 80 m dipole might be just
fine, but you don’t want to use 50 feet of RG-58 to connect your 440 MHz FM transceiver to an
antenna on your roof or on a tower.
Even RG-213 coaxial cable is not really the best choice for use at VHF and UHF frequencies. Most
repeaters, for example, use air-insulated hard line coaxial cable for the feed line.
T9B11
Which of the following types of feed line has the lowest loss at VHF and UHF?
A. 50-ohm flexible coax
B. Multi-conductor unbalanced cable
C. Air-insulated hardline
D. 75-ohm flexible coax
Many other factors, including water intrusion, high SWR, and multiple connectors in line can cause
losses in a coaxial feed line.
T9B08
Which of the following is a source of loss in coaxial feed line?
A. Water intrusion into coaxial connectors
B. High SWR
C. Multiple connectors in the line
D. All these choices are correct
Moisture contamination not only causes higher feed line losses. If not addressed, it can also cause
coaxial cables to fail.
T7C09
Which of the following causes failure of coaxial cables?
A. Moisture contamination
B. Solder flux contamination
C. Rapid fluctuation in transmitter output power
D. Operation at 100% duty cycle for an extended period
51
One way that moisture enters a cable is via cracks in the cable’s outer jacket caused by ultraviolet light.
T7C10
Why should the outer jacket of coaxial cable be resistant to ultraviolet light?
A. Ultraviolet resistant jackets prevent harmonic radiation
B. Ultraviolet light can increase losses in the cable’s jacket
C. Ultraviolet and RF signals can mix, causing interference
D. Ultraviolet light can damage the jacket and allow water to enter the cable
Air-insulated hard line is also susceptible to moisture problems.
T7C11
What is a disadvantage of air core coaxial cable when compared to foam or solid
dielectric types?
A. It has more loss per foot
B. It cannot be used for VHF or UHF antennas
C. It requires special techniques to prevent moisture in the cable
D. It cannot be used at below freezing temperatures
PL-259 connectors are the most common type of connectors used on coaxial cables in amateur radio
stations.
T9B07
Which of the following is true of PL-259 type coax connectors?
A. They are preferred for microwave operation
B. They are watertight
C. They are commonly used at HF and VHF frequencies
D. They are a bayonet-type connector
One problem with PL-259 connectors is that they are not the most suitable connector when operating
at higher frequencies. Even though PL-259 connectors are called UHF connectors, Type N connectors
are a much better choice for UHF frequencies.
T9B06
Which of the following RF connector types is most suitable for frequencies above 400
MHz?
A. UHF (PL-259/SO-239)
B. Type N
C. RS-213
D. DB-25
Coaxial cable connectors can be a real pain to install properly and are a frequent cause of failure. When
installing a feed line, make sure that your coaxial connectors are crimped or soldered properly and that
they make solid connections with one another.
T9B09
What can cause erratic changes in SWR?
52
A. Local thunderstorm
B. Loose connection in the antenna or feed line
C. Over-modulation
D. Overload from a strong local station
53
Standing wave ratio and antenna measurements
Standing wave ratio, or SWR, is a term you’ll often hear when talking about antennas and feed lines. It
is a measure of how well a load, such as an antenna, is matched to a transmission line. When we say
that an antenna is matched to a transmission line, we mean that the impedance of the transmission line
is equal to the impedance of the antenna. If you measure the SWR of a perfectly-matched antenna
system, the SWR meter will read 1:1. The higher the SWR reading, the greater the mismatch between
the antenna and the transmission line.
T9B12
What is standing wave ratio (SWR)?
A. A measure of how well a load is matched to a transmission line
B. The ratio of amplifier power output to input
C. The transmitter efficiency ratio
D. An indication of the quality of your station’s ground connection
T7C04
What reading on an SWR meter indicates a perfect impedance match between the
antenna and the feed line?
A. 50:50
B. Zero
C. 1:1
D. Full Scale
T7C06
What does an SWR reading of 4:1 indicate?
A. Loss of -4 dB
B. Good impedance match
C. Gain of +4 dB
D. Impedance mismatch
When the feed line impedance matches the antenna input impedance, the SWR will be low. Low SWR
on a coaxial cable feed line is a good thing because when the feed line impedance matches the antenna
input impedance, signal losses are low, meaning that the antenna will radiate more power.
T9B01
What is a benefit of low SWR?
A. Reduced television interference
B. Reduced signal loss
C. Less antenna wear
D. All these choices are correct
The bigger the mismatch is between the feed line and the load, the higher the SWR will be. The higher
the SWR, the more power is lost in the feed line. Power converted into heat is not radiated by the
antenna, meaning your radiated signal will be weaker.
T7C07
What happens to power lost in a feed line?
A. It increases the SWR
54
B. It is radiated as harmonics
C. It is converted into heat
D. It distorts the signal
Most amateur radio transceivers today will reduce output power if the antenna system SWR is high.
The reason for this is to protect the radio from being damaged by reflected power.
T7C05
Why do most solid-state transmitters reduce output power as SWR increases beyond a
certain level?
A. To protect the output amplifier transistors
B. To comply with FCC rules on spectral purity
C. Because power supplies cannot supply enough current at high SWR
D. To lower the SWR on the transmission line
When choosing an SWR meter, be sure to note the frequency range over which the meter will operate
and the maximum power level at which you can use the meter. Using a meter outside of the specified
range can result in erroneous readings, and using a meter above the maximum power level can damage
the meter.
T4A02
Which of the following should be considered when selecting an accessory SWR meter?
A. The frequency and power level at which the measurements will be made
B. The distance that the meter will be located from the antenna
C. The types of modulation being used at the station
D. All these choices are correct
An SWR meter is not the only way to measure SWR. You can also measure SWR with a directional
wattmeter.
T7C08
Which instrument can be used to determine SWR?
A. Voltmeter
B. Ohmmeter
C. Iambic pentameter
D. Directional wattmeter
When using a directional wattmeter, you first measure the forward power, then the reflected power, and
using those two values, calculate the SWR. Since the wattmeter measures power, you should install it in
the feedline, between the transmitter and antenna.
T4A05
Where should an RF power meter be installed?
A. In the feed line, between the transmitter and antenna
B. At the power supply output
C. In parallel with the push-to-talk line and the antenna
D. In the power supply cable, as close as possible to the radio
55
Another test instrument that you can use to measure the SWR of an antenna system is the antenna
analyzer. The SWR of an antenna system will be 1:1 at the resonant frequency.
T7C02
Which of the following is used to determine if an antenna is resonant at the desired
operating frequency?
A. A VTVM
B. An antenna analyzer
C. A Q meter
D. A frequency counter
Some antenna analyzers will also let you measure capacitive reactance and inductive reactance, and also
be used as an RF signal generator. These capabilities may be useful in applications other than antenna
analysis.
If an antenna's impedance is not 50 ohms, the impedance at the transmitter end of a feed line will not
be 50 ohms. Don't worry, though. You can use a device called an antenna tuner or antenna coupler to
transform the impedance from whatever it happens to be to 50 ohms. We call this process impedance
matching.
T9B04
What is the major function of an antenna tuner (antenna coupler)?
A. It matches the antenna system impedance to the transceiver's output impedance
B. It helps a receiver automatically tune in weak stations
C. It allows an antenna to be used on both transmit and receive
D. It automatically selects the proper antenna for the frequency band being used
In addition to instruments that make antenna measurements, it's helpful to have an instrument that can
simulate an antenna. That's the purpose of a dummy load. Basically, a dummy load is just a big 50-ohm
resistor that provides a known impedance to the transmitter and converts the transmitter output power
into heat so that it does not get radiated. If a transmitter operates normally when a dummy load is
connected to it, you can be reasonably sure that your transmitter is working properly.
T7C01
What is the primary purpose of a dummy load?
A. To prevent transmitting signals over the air when making tests
B. To prevent over-modulation of a transmitter
C. To improve the efficiency of an antenna
D. To improve the signal-to-noise ratio of a receiver
T7C03 (B)
What does a dummy load consist of?
A. A high-gain amplifier and a TR switch
B. A non-inductive resistor mounted on a heat sink
C. A low-voltage power supply and a DC relay
D. A 50-ohm reactance used to terminate a transmission line
56
Amateur radio signals
Modulation modes and signal bandwidth
Modulation is the process of adding information to a radio wave. For example, to send a voice signal,
you modulate the radio wave with your voice. There are several different types of modulation, but when
you get your Technician license, chances are that frequency modulation (FM) or phase modulation
(PM), is the type of modulation that you’ll use first. When you frequency modulate or phase modulate
a radio signal, the audio actually changes the frequency of the signal a little in proportion to the volume
of the audio signal. An FM receiver detects this frequency change and recreates the audio.
T8A04
Which type of modulation is commonly used for VHF and UHF voice repeaters?
A. AM
B. SSB
C. PSK
D. FM or PM
Packet radio is a way to send digital information over the air. On VHF, this is usually done using an
FM or PM signal. The digital information is sent by changing the frequency of the audio. For example,
a VHF packet radio transmission with a data rate of 1200 baud normally uses a frequency of 2200 Hz
for the space and 1200 Hz for the mark.
T8A02
What type of modulation is commonly used for VHF packet radio transmissions?
A. FM or PM
B. SSB
C. AM
D. PSK
Amplitude modulation, or AM, is another type of modulation. To amplitude modulate a signal, you
vary the amplitude of the signal in proportion to the audio level. Single-sideband, or SSB, is a form of
amplitude modulation. SSB is a better choice than FM for long-distance (weak signal) contacts on the
VHF and UHF bands because it is more energy-efficient than FM, and this is important when trying to
send signals long distances.
T8A01
Which of the following is a form of amplitude modulation?
A. Spread spectrum
B. Packet radio
C. Single sideband
D. Phase shift keying (PSK)
T8A03
Which type of voice mode is often used for long-distance (weak signal) contacts on the
VHF and UHF bands?
A. FM
57
B. DRM
C. SSB
D. PM
A single-sideband signal may be upper-sideband (USB) or lower-sideband (LSB). On frequencies above
14 MHz, amateurs normally use upper sideband.
T8A06
Which sideband is normally used for 10 meter HF, VHF, and UHF single-sideband
communications?
A. Upper sideband
B. Lower sideband
C. Suppressed sideband
D. Inverted sideband
The audio of an FM signal sounds better than an AM signal, but it occupies a wider bandwidth than an
AM or single sideband signal. This means that you can have fewer FM signals in a given frequency
range than SSB signals. A SSB signal is typically 3 kHz wide, while a VHF FM repeater voice signal is
10 – 15 kHz. wide.
T8A07
What is a characteristic of single sideband (SSB) compared to FM?
A. SSB signals are easier to tune in correctly
B. SSB signals are less susceptible to interference
C. SSB signals have narrower bandwidth
D. All these choices are correct
T8A08
What is the approximate bandwidth of a typical single sideband (SSB) voice signal?
A. 1 kHz
B. 3 kHz
C. 6 kHz
D. 15 kHz
T8A09
What is the approximate bandwidth of a VHF repeater FM voice signal?
A. Less than 500 Hz
B. About 150 kHz
C. Between 10 and 15 kHz
D. Between 50 and 125 kHz
Another disadvantage of FM when compared to SSB signals is that you can only receive one signal at a
time. When two signals are present at the input of an FM receiver, the receiver will suppress the weaker
signal and only demodulate the stronger signal. This is known as the capture effect.
T8A12
Which of the following is a disadvantage of FM compared with single sideband?
A. Voice quality is poorer
B. Only one signal can be received at a time
C. FM signals are harder to tune
58
D. All these choices are correct
Some modes have very wide bandwidths, such as AM fast-scan TV. Analog fast-scan color TV signals
are sometimes referred to as NTSC signals because the standard for this type of signal was established
by the National Television System Committee, or NTSC.
T8A10
What is the approximate bandwidth of AM fast-scan TV transmissions?
A. More than 10 MHz
B. About 6 MHz
C. About 3 MHz
D. About 1 MHz
T8D04
What type of transmission is indicated by the term "NTSC?"
A. A Normal Transmission mode in Static Circuit
B. A special mode for satellite uplink
C. An analog fast-scan color TV signal
D. A frame compression scheme for TV signals
Morse Code, or CW, signals have a narrower bandwidth than either AM or FM. The bandwidth of a
CW signal is approximately 150 Hz. Technicians have CW privileges on the 80m, 40m, 15m, and 10m
bands, as well as all the VHF, UHF, and microwave bands.
T8D09
What is CW?
A. A type of electromagnetic propagation
B. A digital mode used primarily on 2 meter FM
C. A technique for coil winding
D. Another name for a Morse code transmission
T8A05
Which of the following types of signal has the narrowest bandwidth?
A. FM voice
B. SSB voice
C. CW
D. Slow-scan TV
T8A11
What is the approximate bandwidth required to transmit a CW signal?
A. 2.4 kHz
B. 150 Hz
C. 1000 Hz
D. 15 kHz
To send Morse Code you can use a straight key or a paddle. A straight key has one set of contacts, and
you make the dits and dahs manually by holding it down for different lengths of time. A paddle, on the
59
other hand, has two sets of contacts which are connected to an electronic keyer. When one set of contacts
is closed, the electronic keyer sends dits. When the other set is closed, the electronic keyer sends dahs.
T4A12
What is an electronic keyer?
A. A device for switching antennas from transmit to receive
B. A device for voice activated switching from receive to transmit
C. A device that assists in manual sending of Morse code
D. An interlock to prevent unauthorized use of a radio
60
Digital modes: packet, PSK31
When hams talk about “digital modes,” we are talking about modes that send digital data rather than
voice or other types of analog signals, such as television. Usually, we connect our transceivers to a
computer to modulate and demodulate the digital signals, but some transceivers can do this internally.
T8D01
Which of the following is a digital communications mode?
A. Packet radio
B. IEEE 802.11
C. FT8
D. All these choices are correct
Packet radio was one of the first digital modes. It is called packet radio because the data to be sent from
station to station are separated into a number of packets which are then sent separately by the
transmitting station and received and re-assembled by the receiving station.
T8D08
Which of the following is included in packet radio transmissions?
A. A check sum that permits error detection
B. A header that contains the call sign of the station to which the information is being sent
C. Automatic repeat request in case of error
D. All these choices are correct
Some amateur radio digital communications systems use protocols which ensure error-free
communications. One such system is called an automatic repeat request, or ARQ, transmission system.
T8D11
What is an ARQ transmission system?
A. A special transmission format limited to video signals
B. A system used to encrypt command signals to an amateur radio satellite
C. An error correction method in which the receiving station detects errors and sends a
request for retransmission
D. A method of compressing data using autonomous reiterative Q codes prior to final
encoding
Automatic Packet Reporting System. or APRS, is one service that uses packet radio. The major
application of APRS is to send location reports while operating a mobile amateur radio station. It can
do this because APRS stations generally include a GPS receiver. In addition to sending GPS position
data, radio amateur also use APRS to send text messages, and weather data.
T8D05
Which of the following is an application of APRS?
A. Providing real-time tactical digital communications in conjunction with a map
showing the locations of stations
B. Showing automatically the number of packets transmitted via PACTOR during a
specific time interval
C. Providing voice over internet connection between repeaters
61
D. Providing information on the number of stations signed into a repeater
T8D03
What kind of data can be transmitted by APRS?
A. GPS position data
B. Text messages
C. Weather data
D. All these choices are correct
A popular digital mode on the HF bands is PSK31. PSK31 is a type of phase shift keying (PSK). PSK
signals are modulated by shifting the phase of the tone being sent.
T8D06
What does the abbreviation "PSK" mean?
A. Pulse Shift Keying
B. Phase Shift Keying
C. Packet Short Keying
D. Phased Slide Keying
The “31” in PSK31 comes from the fact that data is transmitted and received at about 31 baud and that
the bandwidth of a PSK31 signal is only about 31 Hz. Fortunately, that is about how fast most people
can type.
Digital Mobile Radio, or DMR, is an FM digital communications system that’s become quite popular
in amateur radio. It allows amateur radio operators to use the spectrum more efficiently by time-
multiplexing two signals in a single 12.5 kHz repeater channel. It also allows amateur radio operators to
connect with one another over the internet.
T8D07
Which of the following describes DMR?
A. A technique for time-multiplexing two digital voice signals on a single 12.5 kHz
repeater channel
B. An automatic position tracking mode for FM mobiles communicating through repeaters
C. An automatic computer logging technique for hands-off logging when communicating
while operating a vehicle
D. A digital technique for transmitting on two repeater inputs simultaneously for
automatic error correction
WSJT-X software is software that provides weak-signal digital communication modes on amateur radio
frequencies. The WSJT-X software suite is used for Earth-Moon-Earth (EME) contacts, weak sign
propagation beacons, and meteor scatter. To communicate with one of the digital modes that WSJT
software provides, you need a single sideband transceiver and a personal computer with a sound card.
T8D10
Which of the following operating activities is supported by digital mode software in
the WSJT-X software suite?
62
A. Earth-Moon-Earth
B. Weak signal propagation beacons
C. Meteor scatter
D. All these choices are correct
FT8 is one of the modes supported by WSJT.
T8D13
What is FT8?
A. A wideband FM voice mode
B. A digital mode capable of low signal-to-noise operation
C. An eight channel multiplex mode for FM repeaters
D. A digital slow-scan TV mode with forward error correction and automatic color
compensation
Mesh networking is another amateur radio activity that’s becoming popular. Mesh networks use WiFi
frequencies that just happen to be part of the 2.4 GHz, 5.8 GHz, and 10 GHz amateur radio bands.
Mesh networks allow amateur radio stations to establish digital communications links for supporting
high-speed emergency communications and internet connectivity. Broadband-Hamnet and Amateur
Radio Emergency Data Network (AREDN) are two projects that use mesh networking to provide
digital communications.
T8D12
Which of the following best describes an amateur radio mesh network?
A. An amateur-radio based data network using commercial Wi-Fi equipment with
modified firmware
B. A wide-bandwidth digital voice mode employing DMR protocols
C. A satellite communications network using modified commercial satellite TV hardware
D. An internet linking protocol used to network repeaters
63
Amateur radio station safety
Electrical safety
BE SAFE!
When operating or working on amateur radio equipment, it’s possible to come into contact with
dangerous voltages and currents. People have died working on high-voltage circuits. Because it would
be a shame to lose a single person, it’s important to know how to be safe when working with electricity.
30 volts is the commonly accepted value for the lowest voltage that can cause a dangerous electric
shock, and only 100 mA flowing through the body can cause death. These are not very large values.
T0A02
What health hazard is presented by electrical current flowing through the body?
A. It may cause injury by heating tissue
B. It may disrupt the electrical functions of cells
C. It may cause involuntary muscle contractions
D. All these choices are correct
Start by ensuring that your amateur radio station has three-wire electrical outlets that are properly wired
and grounded. When properly wired, three-wire electrical outlets and plugs are safer than two-wire
outlets and plugs, and you should use three-wire plugs for all of your amateur radio equipment. In the
United States, the three wires are hot, neutral, and safety ground, These are color-coded black, white,
and green, respectively. In addition to ensuring that all AC outlets are properly wired, install
mechanical interlocks in high-voltage circuits that disconnect power when equipment enclosures that
contain those circuits are opened.
T0A03
In the United States, what circuit does black wire insulation indicate in a three-wire
120 V cable?
A. Neutral
B. Hot
C. Equipment ground
D. Black insulation is never used
T0A06
What is a good way to guard against electrical shock at your station?
A. Use three-wire cords and plugs for all AC powered equipment
B. Connect all AC powered station equipment to a common safety ground
C. Install mechanical interlocks in high-voltage circuits
D. All these choices are correct
Installing fuses in an electrical circuit is the main way to protect a circuit from excessive current flow, or
overload. Fuses are designed to “blow” or remove power from equipment if the current flowing through
them exceeds a specified value. Fuses should always be in series with the hot conductor only.
64
T0A04
What is the purpose of a fuse in an electrical circuit?
A. To prevent power supply ripple from damaging a component
B. To remove power in case of overload
C. To limit current to prevent shocks
D. All these choices are correct
T0A08
Where should a fuse or circuit breaker be installed in a 120V AC power circuit?
A. In series with the hot conductor only
B. In series with the hot and neutral conductors
C. In parallel with the hot conductor only
D. In parallel with the hot and neutral conductors
When replacing a fuse, always replace the blown fuse with a fuse of the same type and value. Using a
fuse with a larger current rating may allow excessive current to flow in the circuit and cause it to catch
fire.
T0A05
Why should a 5-ampere fuse never be replaced with a 20-ampere fuse?
A. The larger fuse would be likely to blow because it is rated for higher current
B. The power supply ripple would greatly increase
C. Excessive current could cause a fire
D. All these choices are correct
Whenever you’re working on equipment, be sure to disconnect it from the power lines, and even then
be careful when working near a power supply’s capacitors. Some power supplies have large capacitors in
their output circuits that can store a lot of charge, and if you come into contact with them before they
are discharged, you may receive an electrical shock. I always measure a power supply’s output voltage
before working on it or connecting or disconnecting equipment to the supply.
T0A11
What hazard exists in a power supply immediately after turning it off?
A. Circulating currents in the dc filter
B. Leakage flux in the power transformer
C. Voltage transients from kickback diodes
D. Charge stored in filter capacitors
You also need to take precautions when using batteries to power your amateur radio station.
Conventional 12-volt storage batteries present several safety hazards.
T0A01
Which of the following is a safety hazard of a 12-volt storage battery?
A. Touching both terminals with the hands can cause electrical shock
B. Shorting the terminals can cause burns, fire, or an explosion
C. RF emissions from a nearby transmitter can cause the electrolyte to emit poison gas
D. All these choices are correct
T0A10
65
What hazard is caused by charging or discharging a battery too quickly?
A. Overheating or out-gassing
B. Excess output ripple
C. Half-wave rectification
D. Inverse memory effect
66
Antenna and tower safety
Antenna safety is also of primary concern. There are two aspects of antenna safety—being safe when
installing an antenna and safely operating an antenna. When installing an antenna, make sure you note
where the power lines are and position the antenna, so that if it falls, no part of it comes closer than 10
feet to the power wires.
T0B04
Which of the following is an important safety precaution to observe when putting up
an antenna tower?
A. Wear a ground strap connected to your wrist at all times
B. Insulate the base of the tower to avoid lightning strikes
C. Look for and stay clear of any overhead electrical wires
D. All these choices are correct
T0B06
What is the minimum safe distance from a power line to allow when installing an
antenna?
A. Add the height of the antenna to the height of the power line and multiply by a factor of
1.5
B. The height of the power line above ground
C. 1/2 wavelength at the operating frequency
D. Enough so that if the antenna falls, no part of it can come closer than 10 feet to the
power wires
And, you should NEVER attach an antenna to a utility pole because it could contact high-voltage
power lines.
T0B09
Why should you avoid attaching an antenna to a utility pole?
A. The antenna will not work properly because of induced voltages
B. The 60 Hz radiations from the feed line may increase the SWR
C. The antenna could contact high-voltage power lines
D. All these choices are correct
You also should position the antenna so that no one can touch it while you are transmitting.
T0C07
What hazard is created by touching an antenna during a transmission?
A. Electrocution
B. RF burn to skin
C. Radiation poisoning
D. All these choices are correct
There are a number of things you should keep in mind when putting up a tower and installing antennas
on them.
T0B02
What is required when climbing an antenna tower?
67
A. Have sufficient training on safe tower climbing techniques
B. Use appropriate tie-off to the tower at all times
C. Always wear an approved climbing harness
D. All these choices are correct
T0B03
Under what circumstances is it safe to climb a tower without a helper or observer?
A. When no electrical work is being performed
B. When no mechanical work is being performed
C. When the work being done is not more than 20 feet above the ground
D. Never
T0B07
Which of the following is an important safety rule to remember when using a crank-
up tower?
A. This type of tower must never be painted
B. This type of tower must never be grounded
C. This type of tower must not be climbed unless it is retracted, or mechanical safety
locking devices have been installed
D. All these choices are correct
T0B05
What is the purpose of a safety wire through a turnbuckle used to tension guy lines?
A. Secure the guy line if the turnbuckle breaks
B. Prevent loosening of the turnbuckle from vibration
C. Provide a ground path for lightning strikes
D. Provide an ability to measure for proper tensioning
Grounding is very important when installing a tower. The tower is, after all, basically a big lightning
rod. Proper grounding will help shunt a lightning strike to earth before it can get into your amateur
radio station.
T0B11
Which of the following establishes grounding requirements for an amateur radio
tower or antenna?
A. FCC Part 97 rules
B. Local electrical codes
C. FAA tower lighting regulations
D. UL recommended practices
T0B08
Which is a proper grounding method for a tower?
A. A single four-foot ground rod, driven into the ground no more than 12 inches from the
base
B. A ferrite-core RF choke connected between the tower and ground
C. A connection between the tower base and a cold water pipe
D. Separate eight-foot ground rods for each tower leg, bonded to the tower and each
other
68
T0B01
Which of the following is good practice when installing ground wires on a tower for
lightning protection?
A. Put a drip loop in the ground connection to prevent water damage to the ground system
B. Make sure all ground wire bends are right angles
C. Ensure that connections are short and direct
D. All these choices are correct
T0B10
Which of the following is true when installing grounding conductors used for
lightning protection?
A. Use only non-insulated wire
B. Wires must be carefully routed with precise right-angle bends
C. Sharp bends must be avoided
D. Common grounds must be avoided
T0A09
What should be done to all external ground rods or earth connections?
A. Waterproof them with silicone caulk or electrical tape
B. Keep them as far apart as possible
C. Bond them together with heavy wire or conductive strap
D. Tune them for resonance on the lowest frequency of operation
Lightning can also be conducted down a feed line and into your station. To prevent this, several
manufacturers make devices called lightning arrestors that are designed to conduct this current to
ground before it gets into the station. Mount lightning arrestors on a grounded panel near where feed
lines enter a building.
T0A07
Where should a lightning arrester be installed in a coaxial feed line?
A. At the output connector of a transceiver
B. At the antenna feed point
C. At the ac power service panel
D. On a grounded panel near where feed lines enter the building
69
RF hazards and radiation exposure
Even though radio waves are non-ionizing radiation, over-exposure to RF energy can be a safety hazard.
T0C01
What type of radiation are radio signals?
A. Gamma radiation
B. Ionizing radiation
C. Alpha radiation
D. Non-ionizing radiation
T0C12
How does RF radiation differ from ionizing radiation (radioactivity)?
A. RF radiation does not have sufficient energy to cause chemical changes in cells and
damage DNA
B. RF radiation can only be detected with an RF dosimeter
C. RF radiation is limited in range to a few feet
D. RF radiation is perfectly safe
To ensure that your amateur radio station is operating safely, the FCC has set exposure limits. As an
amateur radio station licensee, you are responsible for ensuring that no person is exposed to RF energy
above these limits. There are three ways to determine whether your station complies with FCC RF
exposure regulations:
• By calculation based on FCC OET Bulletin 65
• By calculation based on computer modeling
• By measurement of field strength using calibrated equipment
T0C13
Who is responsible for ensuring that no person is exposed to RF energy above the FCC
exposure limits?
A. The FCC
B. The station licensee
C. Anyone who is near an antenna
D. The local zoning board
T0C06
Which of the following is an acceptable method to determine whether your station
complies with FCC RF exposure regulations?
A. By calculation based on FCC OET Bulletin 65
B. By calculation based on computer modeling
C. By measurement of field strength using calibrated equipment
D. All these choices are correct
One of the factors to consider when performing an RF exposure evaluation is duty cycle. Duty cycle is
defined as the percentage of time that a transmitter is transmitting. Duty cycle is important because it
affects a person’s average exposure to RF radiation. A transmission with a lower duty cycle would be less
hazardous than a high duty cycle transmission.
70
T0C11
What is the definition of duty cycle during the averaging time for RF exposure?
A. The difference between the lowest power output and the highest power output of a
transmitter
B. The difference between the PEP and average power output of a transmitter
C. The percentage of time that a transmitter is transmitting
D. The percentage of time that a transmitter is not transmitting
T0C10
Why is duty cycle one of the factors used to determine safe RF radiation exposure
levels?
A. It affects the average exposure to radiation
B. It affects the peak exposure to radiation
C. It takes into account the antenna feed line loss
D. It takes into account the thermal effects of the final amplifier
T0C03
How does the allowable power density for RF safety change if duty cycle changes from
100 percent to 50 percent?
A. It increases by a factor of 3
B. It decreases by 50 percent
C. It increases by a factor of 2
D. There is no adjustment allowed for lower duty cycle
Because of the way radio waves interact with the body, the exposure limits are different for each
amateur radio band. Oddly, 50 MHz is the frequency at which the human body absorbs the most
radiation. In addition to the frequency and power level of the RF field, the distance from an amateur
station antenna and radiation pattern of the antenna affect how much RF exposure that people will
experience near the antenna.
T0C05
Why do exposure limits vary with frequency?
A. Lower frequency RF fields have more energy than higher frequency fields
B. Lower frequency RF fields do not penetrate the human body
C. Higher frequency RF fields are transient in nature
D. The human body absorbs more RF energy at some frequencies than at others
T0C02
At which of the following frequencies does maximum permissible exposure have the
lowest value?
A. 3.5 MHz
B. 50 MHz
C. 440 MHz
D. 1296 MHz
T0C04
What factors affect the RF exposure of people near an amateur station antenna?
A. Frequency and power level of the RF field
B. Distance from the antenna to a person
C. Radiation pattern of the antenna
71
D. All these choices are correct
So, what should you do if your RF exposure evaluation shows that people are being exposed to excessive
RF?
T0C08
Which of the following actions can reduce exposure to RF radiation?
A. Relocate antennas
B. Relocate the transmitter
C. Increase the duty cycle
D. All these choices are correct
You could also lower the power or simply transmit less.
Finally, you should regularly evaluate your station for RF safety.
T0C09
How can you make sure your station stays in compliance with RF safety regulations?
A. By informing the FCC of any changes made in your station
B. By re-evaluating the station whenever an item in the transmitter or antenna system
is changed
C. By making sure your antennas have low SWR
D. All these choices are correct
72
Station setup and operating controls
Station setup
When setting up an amateur radio station, choosing the radio is the most important consideration, but
you must also choose a wide range of accessories, such as power supplies and microphones. In addition,
how you connect all these pieces of equipment together is important for your station to operate
properly.
For example, a transceiver’s DC power cable should be made with short, heavy-gauge wires. When
transmitting, the transceiver draws a lot of current, and there will be a measurable voltage drop between
the power supply and the transceiver. If this voltage drop is too large, the transceiver could malfunction.
The reason for this voltage drop is the resistance of the wires connecting the power supply to the
transceiver. Short, heavy-gauge wires have a lower resistance than long, thin wires, and will therefore,
cause a lower voltage drop.
T4A03
Why are short, heavy-gauge wires used for a transceiver’s DC power connection?
A. To minimize voltage drop when transmitting
B. To provide a good counterpoise for the antenna
C. To avoid RF interference
D. All these choices are correct
When choosing a power supply, check the voltage and current ratings of the supply and be sure to
choose one capable of supplying the proper voltage and current to power your radio. Let’s look at an
example.
T4A01
Which of the following is an appropriate power supply rating for a typical 50 watt
output mobile FM transceiver?
A. 24.0 volts at 4 amperes
B. 13.8 volts at 4 amperes
C. 24.0 volts at 12 amperes
D. 13.8 volts at 12 amperes
There are two reasons why D is the correct answer. First, most mobile FM transceivers are designed to
operate with a supply voltage between 11 V and 15 V. That means that the correct answer has to be
either B or D. Second, B is incorrect because transceivers are 50% efficient at best, meaning that a 50
W output transceiver will need at least 100 W of power to operate correctly. A supply providing 13.8 V
at 4 amperes is supplying only 55 W of power (P = E x I = 13.8 x 4 = 55.2 W), so this supply would be
under-powered. That leaves D—13.8 volts at 12 amperes—as the correct answer.
A computer has become a common accessory in many amateur radio stations. Amateurs use them to
operate digital modes, log contacts, and design circuits and antennas. I even use mine to Twitter while
I’m on the air. When operating digital modes, such as FT8, you connect the transceiver’s receive audio,
73
transmit audio, and transmitter keying to a computer. The transceiver audio output, such as the speaker
connection, connects to the computer “line in.” Similarly, the transceiver audio input connects to the
“line out” of the computer.
T4A06
What signals are used in a computer-radio interface for digital mode operation?
A. Receive and transmit mode, status, and location
B. Antenna and RF power
C. Receive audio, transmit audio, and transmitter keying
D. NMEA GPS location and DC power
T4A04
How are the transceiver audio input and output connected in a station configured to
operate using FT8?
A. To a computer running a terminal program and connected to a terminal node controller
unit
B. To the audio input and output of a computer running WSJT-X software
C. To an FT8 conversion unit, a keyboard, and a computer monitor
D. To a computer connected to the FT8converter.com website
T4A07
Which of the following connections is made between a computer and a transceiver to
use computer software when operating digital modes?
A. Computer “line out” to transceiver push-to-talk
B. Computer “line in” to transceiver push-to-talk
C. Computer “line in” to transceiver speaker connector
D. Computer “line out” to transceiver speaker connector
Audio, microphone, and power supply cables in an amateur radio station sometimes pick up stray RF
when you’re transmitting. At minimum, this RF can cause the audio to be distorted. At worst, it can
cause a radio or accessory to malfunction. One way to cure this problem is by installing a ferrite choke
on the shield of the microphone cable to block or “choke” any RF currents induced on the cable.
T7B04
Which of the following could you use to cure distorted audio caused by RF current on
the shield of a microphone cable?
A. Band-pass filter
B. Low-pass filter
C. Preamplifier
D. Ferrite choke
Good grounding techniques can help you avoid interference problems. When grounding your
equipment, you should connect the various pieces of equipment to a single point, keep leads short, and
use flat copper strap to connect that point to ground. We sometimes call this process bonding.
T4A08
Which of the following conductors is preferred for bonding at RF?
A. Copper braid removed from coaxial cable
B. Steel wire
C. Twisted-pair cable
74
D. Flat copper strap
If you plan to install a radio in your car and operate mobile, you have a different set of challenges. One
of these challenges is how to connect your radio to the car’s power system. Some amateurs power their
radio a 12-volt auxiliary power jack, but this jack is not designed for high currents. For permanent
installations, you need to connect the negative power return to the 12 volt battery chassis ground.
T4A11
Where should the negative power return of a mobile transceiver be connected in a
vehicle?
A. At the 12 volt battery chassis ground
B. At the antenna mount
C. To any metal part of the vehicle
D. Through the transceiver’s mounting bracket
The positive connection can be made at the battery or through an unused position of the vehicle’s fuse
block.
You can also operate your equipment from a battery when operating portable or at home should the
power be off. Of course, batteries have a finite life, and the more current you draw from the battery,
the faster it will discharge. To determine how long you can operate using battery power, divide the
battery ampere-hour rating by the average current draw of the equipment. For example, if you have a
10 amp-hour battery, and the average current draw is 1 amp, then you can operate for approximately
10 hours: operating time = 10 amp-hours / 1 amp = 10 hours.
T4A09
How can you determine the length of time that equipment can be powered from a
battery?
A. Divide the watt-hour rating of the battery by the peak power consumption of the
equipment
B. Divide the battery ampere-hour rating by the average current draw of the
equipment
C. Multiply the watts per hour consumed by the equipment by the battery power rating
D. Multiply the square of the current rating of the battery by the input resistance of the
equipment
75
Operating controls
To properly operate a transceiver, you need to know how to use the controls. Perhaps the most
important transmitter control is microphone gain. Setting the gain too high will result in distorted
audio.
T4B01
What is the effect of excessive microphone gain on SSB transmissions?
A. Frequency instability
B. Distorted transmitted audio
C. Increased SWR
D. All these choices are correct
You also need to know how to properly set the operating frequency of your transceiver. One reason for
this is that setting the frequency of an FM receiver above or below a signal’s frequency will result in
distorted receive audio.
T4B12
What is the result of tuning an FM receiver above or below a signal’s frequency?
A. Change in audio pitch
B. Sideband inversion
C. Generation of a heterodyne tone
D. Distortion of the signal’s audio
Many modern transceivers allow you to set the operating frequency in several different ways:
• Punching in a number on a keypad.
• Rotating the VFO knob.
• Storing it in a memory channel and then recalling it for quick access.
T4B02
Which of the following can be used to enter a transceiver’s operating frequency?
A. The keypad or VFO knob
B. The CTCSS or DTMF encoder
C. The Automatic Frequency Control
D. All these choices are correct
T4B04
What is a way to enable quick access to a favorite frequency or channel on your
transceiver?
A. Enable the frequency offset
B. Store it in a memory channel
C. Enable the VOX
D. Use the scan mode to select the desired frequency
Transceivers that allow you to store frequencies in memory often have the ability to step through those
frequencies, one at a time, stopping when a signal is received. This is called scanning and allows you to
tune through a range of frequencies to check for activity.
T4B05
76
What does the scanning function of an FM transceiver do?
A. Checks incoming signal deviation
B. Prevents interference to nearby repeaters
C. Tunes through a range of frequencies to check for activity
D. Checks for messages left on a digital bulletin board
A common receiver control on VHF/UHF transceivers is the squelch control. Its purpose is to mute the
receiver audio unless you are receiving a signal above a set signal strength.
T2B13
What is the purpose of a squelch function?
A. Reduce a CW transmitter's key clicks
B. Mute the receiver audio when a signal is not present
C. Eliminate parasitic oscillations in an RF amplifier
D. Reduce interference from impulse noise
T4B03
How is squelch adjusted so that a weak FM signal can be heard?
A. Set the squelch threshold so that receiver output audio is on all the time
B. Turn up the audio level until it overcomes the squelch threshold
C. Turn on the anti-squelch function
D. Enable squelch enhancement
Another common setting on VHF/UHF transceivers is the offset frequency. This is especially important
when operating repeaters. This setting specifies the difference between the repeater’s transmit frequency
and receive frequency.
T2A07
What is meant by "repeater offset”?
A. The difference between a repeater’s transmit and receive frequencies
B. The repeater has a time delay to prevent interference
C. The repeater station identification is done on a separate frequency
D. The number of simultaneous transmit frequencies used by a repeater
In recent years, radios that digitize one’s voice and then send the digitized voice over the air have
become quite popular. The operating modes that these radios use are called digital modes. Two of the
most popular digital modes are DMR (Digital Mobile Radio) and D-STAR (Digital Smart Technology
for Amateur Radio).
One of the reasons digital modes are so popular is that the digitized voice information can not only be
transmitted over the air, but also over the internet. To connect to other radio amateurs over the
internet, digital mode radios can use a repeater that is connected to the internet or a digital mode hot
spot that connect to the internet via a personal computer or smart phone with an internet connection.
T4A10
What function is performed with a transceiver and a digital mode hot spot?
A. Communication using digital voice or data systems via the internet
B. FT8 digital communications via AFSK
77
C. RTTY encoding and decoding without a computer
D. High-speed digital communications for meteor scatter
DMR has a feature called talkgroups. Talk groups are virtual channels, and when you access a talkgroup,
your signal is routed to other radio amateurs who have also accessed that talkgroup, no matter where in
the world they are. To use this feature, you must program your radio to properly access repeaters and
the talkgroups. This programming information is contained in a DMR radio’s code plug.
T8D02
What is a “talkgroup” on a digital repeater?
A. A group of operators sharing common interests
B. A way for groups of users to share a channel at different times without hearing other
users on the channel
C. A protocol that increases the signal-to-noise ratio when multiple repeaters are linked
together
D. A net that meets at a specified time
T2B07
How can you join a digital repeater’s “talkgroup”?
A. Register your radio with the local FCC office
B. Join the repeater owner’s club
C. Program your radio with the group’s ID or code
D. Sign your call after the courtesy tone
T4B07
What does a DMR “code plug” contain?
A. Your call sign in CW for automatic identification
B. Access information for repeaters and talkgroups
C. The codec for digitizing audio
D. The DMR software version
T4B09
How is a specific group of stations selected on a digital voice transceiver?
A. By retrieving the frequencies from transceiver memory
B. By enabling the group’s CTCSS tone
C. By entering the group’s identification code
D. By activating automatic identification
One of the bits of information that you enter into the code plug is the color code.
T2B12
What is the purpose of the color code used on DMR repeater systems?
A. Must match the repeater color code for access
B. Defines the frequency pair to use
C. Identifies the codec used
D. Defines the minimum signal level required for access
Part of the information sent when you use a digital voice transceiver, be it a DMR or D-STAR radio, is
your call sign. Before you use the radio, you must program the radio with your call sign.
T4B11
78
Which of the following must be programmed into a D-STAR digital transceiver before
transmitting?
A. Your call sign
B. Your output power
C. The codec type being used
D. All these choices are correct
HF transceivers have many controls not found on VHF/UHF FM transceivers. For example, they are
often equipped with a variety of different filters. The reason for this is that using the appropriate filter
for the mode you are operating can make operating a lot easier.
T4B08
What is the advantage of having multiple receive bandwidth choices on a multimode
transceiver?
A. Permits monitoring several modes at once by selecting a separate filter for each mode
B. Permits noise or interference reduction by selecting a bandwidth matching the
mode
C. Increases the number of frequencies that can be stored in memory
D. Increases the amount of offset between receive and transmit frequencies
T4B10
Which of the following receiver filter bandwidths provides the best signal-to-noise
ratio for SSB reception?
A. 500 Hz
B. 1000 Hz
C. 2400 Hz
D. 5000 Hz
A common receiver control on HF transceivers is the Receiver Incremental Tuning, or RIT, control. Its
purpose is to set the receive frequency slightly off from the transmit frequency. On some radios, this
control is called the clarifier.
T4B06
Which of the following controls could be used if the voice pitch of a single-sideband
signal returning to your CQ call seems too high or low?
A. The AGC or limiter
B. The bandwidth selection
C. The tone squelch
D. The RIT or Clarifier
A common transmitter control is push-to-talk, or PTT. Most of the time PTT refers to an actual switch
on the microphone that an operator must push to begin transmitting, but it also refers to the name of a
signal line on a transceiver’s accessory socket that can be used to automatically switch a transceiver into
transmit mode.
T7A07
What is the function of a transceiver’s PTT input?
A. Input for a key used to send CW
79
B. Switches transceiver from receive to transmit when grounded
C. Provides a transmit tuning tone when grounded
D. Input for a preamplifier tuning tone
80
Station equipment
Receivers, transmitters, transceivers, and transverters
In the early days of radio, radio amateurs used separate receivers and transmitter units. Nowadays,
however, most use radios that combine function both as the transmitter and receiver. These units are
called transceivers.
T7A02
What is a transceiver?
A. A device that combines a receiver and transmitter
B. A device for matching feed line impedance to 50 ohms
C. A device for automatically sending and decoding Morse code
D. A device for converting receiver and transmitter frequencies to another band
Often, HF transceivers are used with devices called transverters that convert the signals from an HF
transceiver to the VHF, UHF, and even microwave bands. Transverters take the output of an HF
transceiver, normally set to the 10-meter (28 MHz) band and output a VHF, UHF, or microwave
signal. Conversely, they receive a VHF, UHF, or microwave signal and output a signal in the 10-meter
band that is demodulated by the HF transceiver.
T7A06
What device converts the RF input and output of a transceiver to another band?
A. High pass filter
B. Low-pass filter
C. Transverter
D. Phase converter
Many, if not most, new amateurs buy a handheld transceiver, called an “HT,” as their first transceiver.
One disadvantage of using a handheld transceiver is that the maximum output power is generally only 5
W, and because of this, they have limited range. To get around this limitation, you can use an RF
amplifier to boost the power.
T7A10
What device increases the transmitted output power from a transceiver?
A. A voltage divider
B. An RF power amplifier
C. An impedance network
D. All these choices are correct
T7A09
What is the function of the SSB/CW-FM switch on a VHF power amplifier?
A. Change the mode of the transmitted signal
B. Set the amplifier for proper operation in the selected mode
C. Change the frequency range of the amplifier to operate in the proper segment of the
band
D. Reduce the received signal noise
When talking about a transceiver’s specifications, we still refer to its receiver and transmitter. The two
81
most important receiver specifications are sensitivity and selectivity.
T7A01
Which term describes the ability of a receiver to detect the presence of a signal?
A. Linearity
B. Sensitivity
C. Selectivity
D. Total Harmonic Distortion
T7A04
Which term describes the ability of a receiver to discriminate between multiple signals?
A. Discrimination ratio
B. Sensitivity
C. Selectivity
D. Harmonic distortion
To improve the sensitivity of a receiver, you can use an RF preamplifier. An RF preamplifier amplifies
signals that you want to receive.
T7A11
Where is an RF preamplifier installed?
A. Between the antenna and receiver
B. At the output of the transmitter power amplifier
C. Between the transmitter and the antenna tuner
D. At the output of the receiver audio amplifier
Many HF transceivers have some version of a superheterodyne receiver. A superheterodyne receiver
converts an incoming radio signal to an intermediate frequency, or IF. The circuit that does this is the
mixer.
T7A03
Which of the following is used to convert a signal from one frequency to another?
A. Phase splitter
B. Mixer
C. Inverter
D. Amplifier
When transmitting or receiving, we want to generate an RF signal with a specific frequency. To do that,
we use an oscillator.
T7A05
What is the name of a circuit that generates a signal at a specific frequency?
A. Reactance modulator
B. Phase modulator
C. Low-pass filter
D. Oscillator
To transmit a voice or data signal, we have to combine an audio frequency signal from the microphone
with the RF carrier signal generated by the transmitter. This is done with a circuit called a modulator,
82
and the process of combining speech with an RF carrier signal is called modulation.
T7A08
Which of the following describes combining speech with an RF carrier signal?
A. Impedance matching
B. Oscillation
C. Modulation
D. Low-pass filtering
83
Symptoms, causes, and cures of common transmitter and receiver
problems
Since Murphy’s Law—the law that states if anything can go wrong, it will—applies to amateur radio as
much as it does to any other pursuit, at some point you will have to deal with problems. These may
include overload, distortion, feedback, and radio frequency interference, or RFI.
Let’s first consider radio frequency interference.
T7B03
Which of the following can cause radio frequency interference?
A. Fundamental overload
B. Harmonics
C. Spurious emissions
D. All these choices are correct
Any of these could cause interference to a TV set or radio or even computer speakers, and you will want
to take steps to find and eliminate that interference. The first thing that you should do if your neighbor
complains about interference is to make sure that your station is functioning properly by making sure
that your transmissions do not cause interference to your radios or televisions.
T7B06
Which of the following actions should you take if a neighbor tells you that your
station’s transmissions are interfering with their radio or TV reception?
A. Make sure that your station is functioning properly and that it does not cause
interference to your own radio or television when it is tuned to the same channel
B. Immediately turn off your transmitter and contact the nearest FCC office for assistance
C. Install a harmonic doubler on the output of your transmitter and tune it until the
interference is eliminated
D. All these choices are correct
While it’s not very likely that your amateur radio station will interfere with a neighbor’s cable TV
service, it can sometimes occur. If you are interfering with a neighbor’s cable TV service, first check the
coax connectors.
T7B09
What should be the first step to resolve non-fiber optic cable TV interference caused
by your amateur radio transmission?
A. Add a low-pass filter to the TV antenna input
B. Add a high-pass filter to the TV antenna input
C. Add a preamplifier to the TV antenna input
D. Be sure all TV feed line coaxial connectors are installed properly
Your amateur radio station may interfere with a nearby radio receiver if your signal is so strong that the
receiver cannot reject the signal even though your signal is not on the frequency to which the receiver is
tuned. This is called fundamental overload.
T7B02
What would cause a broadcast AM or FM radio to receive an amateur radio
84
transmission unintentionally?
A. The receiver is unable to reject strong signals outside the AM or FM band
B. The microphone gain of the transmitter is turned up too high
C. The audio amplifier of the transmitter is overloaded
D. The deviation of an FM transmitter is set too low
To reduce or eliminate fundamental overload, you can install a filter at the radio or TV input to block
the interfering signal.
T7B05
How can fundamental overload of a non-amateur radio or TV receiver by an amateur
signal be reduced or eliminated?
A. Block the amateur signal with a filter at the antenna input of the affected receiver
B. Block the interfering signal with a filter on the amateur transmitter
C. Switch the transmitter from FM to SSB
D. Switch the transmitter to a narrow-band mode
The process can work the other way, too. When driving by the antenna of a high-power broadcast
station you may notice that your VHF transceiver is picking up the broadcast station signal. This is
often the result of overload. To reduce this interference, you may want to install a band-reject filter
designed to attenuate signals in the FM broadcast band.
T7B07
Which of the following can reduce overload of a VHF transceiver by a nearby
commercial FM station?
A. Installing an RF preamplifier
B. Using double-shielded coaxial cable
C. Installing bypass capacitors on the microphone cable
D. Installing a band-reject filter
Interference works both ways. Your neighbors may have wireless devices that can interfere with your
station. While they are responsible for eliminating the interference, chances are they don’t have the
expertise necessary to find and eliminate the interference, so your best option is to try and work with
them.
T7B08
What should you do if something in a neighbor’s home is causing harmful interference
to your amateur station?
A. Work with your neighbor to identify the offending device
B. Politely inform your neighbor that FCC rules prohibit the use of devices that cause
interference
C. Make sure your station meets the standards of good amateur practice
D. All these choices are correct
Perhaps the most common problem that amateur radio operators have is distorted or noisy audio when
transmitting. There are many reasons for poor audio.
85
T7B10
What might be a problem if you receive a report that your audio signal through an FM
repeater is distorted or unintelligible?
A. Your transmitter is slightly off frequency
B. Your batteries are running low
C. You are in a bad location
D. All these choices are correct
T7B11
What is a symptom of RF feedback in a transmitter or transceiver?
A. Excessive SWR at the antenna connection
B. The transmitter will not stay on the desired frequency
C. Reports of garbled, distorted, or unintelligible voice transmissions
D. Frequent blowing of power supply fuses
Sometimes, garbled or distorted audio when operating FM is the result of over-deviation. Over-
deviation occurs when the amplitude of the audio modulating the transmitter is too high. Fortunately,
there’s an easy fix. Simply talk farther away from the microphone.
T7B01
What can you do if you are told your FM handheld or mobile transceiver is over-
deviating?
A. Talk louder into the microphone
B. Let the transceiver cool off
C. Change to a higher power level
D. Talk farther away from the microphone
86
Using basic test instruments and soldering
The most common test instrument in an amateur radio shack is the multimeter. Multimeters are called
that because they combine the functions of a voltmeter, ohmmeter, and ammeter into a single
instrument.
T7D07
Which of the following measurements are made using a multimeter?
A. Signal strength and noise
B. Impedance and reactance
C. Voltage and resistance
D. All these choices are correct
The voltmeter function of the multimeter is used to measure electric potential, more commonly known
as voltage. You measure the voltage across a component or circuit by connecting the leads in parallel
with the component.
T7D01
Which instrument would you use to measure electric potential?
A. An ammeter
B. A voltmeter
C. A wavemeter
D. An ohmmeter
T7D02
How is a voltmeter connected to a component to measure applied voltage?
A. In series
B. In parallel
C. In quadrature
D. In phase
In order to avoid damaging the multimeter, make sure that it’s set to the voltage setting, not the
resistance setting when you want to measure voltage.
T7D06
Which of the following can damage a multimeter?
A. Attempting to measure resistance using the voltage setting
B. Failing to connect one of the probes to ground
C. Attempting to measure voltage when using the resistance setting
D. Not allowing it to warm up properly
If you are going to be measuring high voltages, make sure that the voltmeter and leads are rated for
those voltages. Failure to do so is unsafe and could result in damaging the meter.
T0A12
Which of the following precautions should be taken when measuring high voltages
with a voltmeter?
A. Ensure that the voltmeter has very low impedance
B. Ensure that the voltmeter and leads are rated for use at the voltages to be measured
87
C. Ensure that the circuit is grounded through the voltmeter
D. Ensure that the voltmeter is set to the correct frequency
The ohmmeter function of a multimeter is used to measure resistance. The way an ohmmeter measures
the resistance of a circuit is by supplying a known current to the circuit, measuring the voltage across
the circuit, and then calculating the resistance using Ohm's Law, R = V/I. Because we’re actually
measuring voltage, we connect an ohmmeter in parallel with a component to measure its resistance.
T7D05
How is an ohmmeter connected to a component to measure its resistance?
A. In parallel
B. In series
C. In cascade
D. All these choices are correct
T7D11
Which of the following precautions should be taken when measuring in-circuit
resistance with an ohmmeter?
A. Ensure that the applied voltages are correct
B. Ensure that the circuit is not powered
C. Ensure that the circuit is grounded
D. Ensure that the circuit is operating at the correct frequency
T7D10
What reading indicates that an ohmmeter is connected across a large, discharged
capacitor?
A. Increasing resistance with time
B. Decreasing resistance with time
C. Steady full-scale reading
D. Alternating between open and short circuit
The ammeter function of a multimeter is used to measure current. You connect an ammeter in series
with a circuit so that the current flowing through the circuit also flows through the ammeter.
T7D04
Which instrument is used to measure electric current?
A. An ohmmeter
B. An electrometer
C. A voltmeter
D. An ammeter
T7D03
When configured to measure current, how is a multimeter connected to a component?
A. In series
B. In parallel
C. In quadrature
D. In phase
88
In addition to knowing how to make electrical measurements, knowing how to solder is an essential
skill for amateur radio operators.
T7D08
Which of the following types of solder should not be used for radio and electronic
applications?
A. Acid-core solder
B. Lead-tin solder
C. Rosin-core solder
D. Tin-copper solder
Using acid-core solder could leave an acidic residue that will degrade the connection over time.
T7D09
What is the characteristic appearance of a cold tin-lead solder joint?
A. Dark black spots
B. A bright or shiny surface
C. A rough or lumpy surface
D. Excessive solder
We call a poor solder joint a “cold” solder joint because it's usually the result of not applying enough
heat to the joint. When you don't apply enough heat to a solder joint, the solder does not flow
smoothly between the metal surfaces to be joined and often does not make a good connection.
89
Operating procedures
FM Operation
Most Technicians purchase a VHF/UHF FM transceiver as their first amateur radio. This type of radio
allows them to use repeaters and participate in public-service events.
T1F09 [97.3(a)(40)]
What type of amateur station simultaneously retransmits the signal of another
amateur station on a different channel or channels?
A. Beacon station
B. Earth station
C. Repeater station
D. Message forwarding station
T1D07 [97.113(d)]
What types of amateur stations can automatically retransmit the signals of other
amateur stations?
A. Auxiliary, beacon, or Earth stations
B. Earth, repeater, or space stations
C. Beacon, repeater, or space stations
D. Repeater, auxiliary, or space stations
To increase the range of a repeater system, some repeater operators link their repeaters with other
repeaters. When linked in this way, a signal received by one repeater is retransmitted by all the other
repeaters in the network. This can give the repeater network extremely wide coverage.
T2B03
Which of the following describes a linked repeater network?
A. A network of repeaters in which signals received by one repeater are transmitted by
all the repeaters in the network
B. A single repeater with more than one receiver
C. Multiple repeaters with the same control operator
D. A system of repeaters linked by APRS
To use repeaters, you need to know how to set up your radio. Repeaters receive on one frequency and
transmit on another. You program your radio so that it receives on the repeater’s transmit frequency
and transmits on the repeater’s receive frequency. The difference between the transmit frequency and
receive frequency is called the repeater frequency offset. The frequency offset for 2-meter repeaters is
most often 600 kHz, while the most common repeater frequency offset in the 70-cm band is 5 MHz.
T2A01
What is a common repeater frequency offset in the 2 meter band?
A. Plus or minus 5 MHz
B. Plus or minus 600 kHz
C. Plus or minus 500 kHz
D. Plus or minus 1 MHz
90
T2A03
What is a common repeater frequency offset in the 70 cm band?
A. Plus or minus 5 MHz
B. Plus or minus 600 kHz
C. Plus or minus 500 kHz
D. Plus or minus 1 MHz
Because repeaters often operate in environments where there is a lot of interference, they are
programmed not to repeat a signal unless the signal has a sub-audible tone of a specific frequency. These
tones are sometimes called PL (short for “private line”) tones. PL is a Motorola trademark. The generic
term for these tones is CTCSS (short for “continuous tone-coded squelch system”). If your radio has
not been programmed to transmit the proper sub-audible tone when you transmit, the repeater will not
repeat your transmission.
T2B02
What term describes the use of a sub-audible tone transmitted along with normal voice
audio to open the squelch of a receiver?
A. Carrier squelch
B. Tone burst
C. DTMF
D. CTCSS
A frequent problem is being able to hear a repeater, but not being able to access it. There could be
several reasons for this.
T2B04
Which of the following could be the reason you are unable to access a repeater whose
output you can hear?
A. Improper transceiver offset
B. You are using the wrong CTCSS tone
C. You are using the wrong DCS code
D. All these choices are correct
A Digital Code Squelch, or DCS, tone is similar to a CTCSS tone in that it is sub-audible and opens
the squelch of a repeater when a station is trying to access it. They are, however, not very common.
If a station does not have a good signal into a repeater, you may want to listen for it on the repeater
input frequency. One way to listen to the repeater input frequency would be to use the reverse function
of your VHF/UHF transceiver, if it has this feature. When enabled, the reverse function will cause your
transceiver to transmit on the repeater output frequency and receive on the input frequency.
T2B01
How is a VHF/UHF transceiver’s “reverse” function used?
A. To reduce power output
B. To increase power output
C. To listen on a repeater’s input frequency
D. To listen on a repeater’s output frequency
91
Another problem you may encounter when operating FM is over-deviation. Over-deviation occurs
when the amplitude of the audio modulating the transmitter is too high. This can happen if you speak
too loudly into the microphone. This will cause your signal to deviate too much, and that can cause
distortion.
T2B05
What would cause your FM transmission audio to be distorted on voice peaks?
A. Your repeater offset is inverted
B. You need to talk louder
C. You are talking too loudly
D. Your transmit power is too high
In addition to knowing how to set the controls of your radio, you need to know the protocol for
making contacts. When using a repeater, the protocol is very simple. To make contact with another
station via a repeater, simply sat the station’s call sign, then identify by saying your call sign. To indicate
that you’re listening to a repeater and would like to make contact with another station, say your call
sign, then “listening” or “monitoring.”
T2A04
What is an appropriate way to call another station on a repeater if you know the other
station's call sign?
A. Say "break, break," then say the station's call sign
B. Say the station's call sign, then identify with your call sign
C. Say "CQ" three times, then the other station's call sign
D. Wait for the station to call CQ, then answer
T2A09
Which of the following indicates that a station is listening on a repeater and looking
for a contact?
A. “CQ CQ” followed by the station’s call sign
B. The station’s call sign followed by the word “monitoring”
C. The repeater call sign followed by the station’s call sign
D. “QSY” followed by your call sign
So, for example, if I want to talk to Ralph, AA8RK, on our local repeater, I would say, “AA8RK,
KB6NU.” If Ralph was listening—and was available to talk—he would then say, “KB6NU, AA8RK,”
and we would begin our contact. If I wasn’t looking for anyone in particular, I would say, “KB6NU
monitoring” or “KB6NU listening.”
Repeater operation is called duplex operation because you’re transmitting and receiving on two different
frequencies. When two stations are operating on the same frequency, without the aid of a repeater, it's
called simplex operation.
T2A11
What term describes an amateur station that is transmitting and receiving on the same
92
frequency?
A. Full duplex
B. Diplex
C. Simplex
D. Multiplex
On each VHF and UHF band, there are frequencies designated for simplex operation. Operating
simplex on these frequencies allows stations to communicate with one another without tying up a
repeater.
T2B09
Why are simplex channels designated in the VHF/UHF band plans?
A. So stations within range of each other can communicate without tying up a repeater
B. For contest operation
C. For working DX only
D. So stations with simple transmitters can access the repeater without automated offset
To help amateurs operating simplex find one another, a frequency on each band has been set aside as
the “national calling frequency.” 146.52 MHz is the national calling frequency for FM simplex
operation in the 2 m band.
T2A02
What is the national calling frequency for FM simplex operations in the 2 meter band?
A. 146.520 MHz
B. 145.000 MHz
C. 432.100 MHz
D. 446.000 MHz
446.000 MHz is the national calling frequency for the 70 cm band.
93
HF Operation
On the HF bands, signals can be easy to copy or difficult to copy. Because this is the case, the protocol
for making contacts is more complex than the repeater protocol. On HF, when you want to contact
another station, you “call CQ.” That is to say, you would say something like, “CQ CQ CQ. This is
KB6NU.” This means that you are open to a call from any station.
T2A08
What is the meaning of the procedural signal “CQ”?
A. Call on the quarter hour
B. Test transmission, no reply expected
C. Only the called station should transmit
D. Calling any station
You don’t want to just start calling CQ willy-nilly, though. Doing so might interfere with other
amateur stations. First, make sure that you are authorized to use that frequency. Then, listen to be sure
that no one else is using the frequency, and finally, ask if the frequency is in use.
T2A12
What should you do before calling CQ?
A. Listen first to be sure that no one else is using the frequency
B. Ask if the frequency is in use
C. Make sure you are authorized to use that frequency
D. All these choices are correct
Knowing how to reply to a CQ is also important. Knowing the commonly accepted protocol will make
it easier to make contacts.
T2A05
How should you respond to a station calling CQ?
A. Transmit "CQ" followed by the other station’s call sign
B. Transmit your call sign followed by the other station’s call sign
C. Transmit the other station’s call sign followed by your call sign
D. Transmit a signal report followed by your call sign
For example, if my friend Ralph, AA8RK, heard my call and wanted to talk to me, he would reply,
“KB6NU this is AA8RK. Over.” Then, I would return the call, and our contact would begin. If signal
conditions are poor, you may want to repeat your call sign and state your call sign in a phonetic
alphabet.
It’s important to always identify your station, even when only performing tests.
T2A06
Which of the following is required when making on-the-air test transmissions?
A. Identify the transmitting station
B. Conduct tests only between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. local time
C. Notify the FCC of the transmissions
D. All these choices are correct
94
As a Technician, you will be able to operate Morse Code on certain portions of the 80 m, 40 m, 15 m,
and 10 m bands. To shorten the number of characters sent during a CW contact, amateurs often use
three-letter combinations called Q-signals. Q signals are three-letter combinations, beginning with the
letter “Q,” that stand for commonly-used phrases. You need to know the meaning of two of these Q
signals: QRM and QSY.
T2B10
Which Q signal indicates that you are receiving interference from other stations?
A. QRM
B. QRN
C. QTH
D. QSB
T2B11
Which Q signal indicates that you are changing frequency?
A. QRU
B. QSY
C. QSL
D. QRZ
FCC rules specify broadly where amateur radio operators have operating privileges, but they are not
very detailed. Band plans take this one step further, suggesting where amateurs should use certain
modes.
T2A10
What is a band plan, beyond the privileges established by the FCC?
A. A voluntary guideline for using different modes or activities within an amateur
band
B. A list of operating schedules
C. A list of available net frequencies
D. A plan devised by a club to indicate frequency band use
While not always adhered to, another basic tenet of amateur radio is to operate courteously and avoid
interfering with other stations.
T2B08
Which of the following applies when two stations transmitting on the same frequency
interfere with each other?
A. The stations should negotiate continued use of the frequency
B. Both stations should choose another frequency to avoid conflict
C. Interference is inevitable, so no action is required
D. Use subaudible tones so both stations can share the frequency
95
Public service and emergency communications
One of the reasons amateur radio exists at all is that ham radio operators are uniquely set up to provide
emergency and public-service communications. As a result, many hams consider it an obligation to be
prepared to help out when called upon to do so. This includes having the proper equipment and
knowing the proper operating procedures. There are two organizations that provide emergency
communications: the Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES) and the Amateur Radio
Emergency Service (ARES).
T2C06
What is the Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES)?
A. A group of licensed amateurs who have voluntarily registered their qualifications
and equipment for communications duty in the public service
B. A group of licensed amateurs who are members of the military and who voluntarily
agreed to provide message handling services in the case of an emergency
C. A training program that provides licensing courses for those interested in obtaining an
amateur license to use during emergencies
D. A training program that certifies amateur operators for membership in the Radio
Amateur Civil Emergency Service
T1A10 [97.3(a)(38), 97.407]
What is the Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES)?
A. A radio service using amateur frequencies for emergency management or civil defense
communications
B. A radio service using amateur stations for emergency management or civil defense
communications
C. An emergency service using amateur operators certified by a civil defense organization as
being enrolled in that organization
D. All these choices are correct
T2C04
What is RACES?
A. An emergency organization combining amateur radio and citizens band operators and
frequencies
B. An international radio experimentation society
C. A radio contest held in a short period, sometimes called a “sprint”
D. An FCC part 97 amateur radio service for civil defense communications during
national emergencies
When an emergency occurs, it’s common for amateur radio operators to form a network or “net” to
facilitate emergency communications. The net is led by the net control station, or NCS, whose job
includes calling the net to order and directing communications between stations checking in. Stations
other than the net control station are said to “check in” to the net.
T2C02
Which of the following are typical duties of a Net Control Station?
A. Choose the regular net meeting time and frequency
96
B. Ensure that all stations checking into the net are properly licensed for operation on the
net frequency
C. Call the net to order and direct communications between stations checking in
D. All these choices are correct
When you check into a net, you must take your lead from the net control station, and transmit only
when directed to by the net control station, unless you are reporting an emergency.
T2C07
Which of the following is standard practice when you participate in a net?
A. When first responding to the net control station, transmit your call sign, name, and
address as in the FCC database
B. Record the time of each of your transmissions
C. Unless you are reporting an emergency, transmit only when directed by the net
control station
D. All these choices are correct
One of the functions of an emergency communications net is to pass messages between stations that
have checked into the net. The term for messages passed between stations in a net is “traffic,” and the
process of passing messages to and from amateur radio stations is called handling traffic. When
handling traffic, you should try to pass messages exactly as received. One way to do this is to spell
names or unusual words using a standard phonetic alphabet.
T2C05
What does the term “traffic” refer to in net operation?
A. Messages exchanged by net stations
B. The number of stations checking in and out of a net|
C. Operation by mobile or portable stations
D. Requests to activate the net by a served agency
T2C08
Which of the following is a characteristic of good traffic handling?
A. Passing messages exactly as received
B. Making decisions as to whether messages are worthy of relay or delivery
C. Ensuring that any newsworthy messages are relayed to the news media
D. All these choices are correct
T2C03
What technique is used to ensure that voice messages containing unusual words are
received correctly?
A. Send the words by voice and Morse code
B. Speak very loudly into the microphone
C. Spell the words using a standard phonetic alphabet
D. All these choices are correct
Formal traffic messages consists of four parts: preamble, address, text, signature. The preamble contains
information needed to track the message. Part of the preamble is the check. The check is the number of
97
words or word equivalents in the text portion of the message. Operator use the check to help ensure
that a message is received exactly as sent.
T2C10
What information is contained in the preamble of a formal traffic message?
A. The email address of the originating station
B. The address of the intended recipient
C. The telephone number of the addressee
D. Information needed to track the message
T2C11
What is meant by “check” in a radiogram header?
A. The number of words or word equivalents in the text portion of the message
B. The call sign of the originating station
C. A list of stations that have relayed the message
D. A box on the message form that indicates that the message was received and/or relayed
Even in emergencies, you must follow FCC rules when operating an amateur radio station. The normal
rules are, however, relaxed a little during true emergencies.
T2C01 [97.103(a)]
When do FCC rules NOT apply to the operation of an amateur station?
A. When operating a RACES station
B. When operating under special FEMA rules
C. When operating under special ARES rules
D. FCC rules always apply
T2C09
Are amateur station control operators ever permitted to operate outside the frequency
privileges of their license class?
A. No
B. Yes, but only when part of a FEMA emergency plan
C. Yes, but only when part of a RACES emergency plan
D. Yes, but only in situations involving the immediate safety of human life or
protection of property
It's kind of a Catch-22. FCC rules always apply to the operation of an amateur radio station, but the
rules say that you can do almost anything in a true emergency.
98
Amateur satellite operation
Making contacts via amateur radio satellites and other space stations is one of the coolest things a ham
can do. As a Technician Class licensee, you will have the privileges to do this.
T1B02 [97.301, 97.207(c)]
Which amateurs may contact the International Space Station (ISS) on VHF bands?
A. Any amateur holding a General class or higher license
B. Any amateur holding a Technician class or higher license
C. Any amateur holding a General class or higher license who has applied for and received
approval from NASA
D. Any amateur holding a Technician class or higher license who has applied for and
received approval from NASA
Amateur satellites are basically repeaters in space. As such they have an uplink frequency, which is the
frequency on which you transmit and the satellite receives, and a downlink frequency, on which the
satellite transmits and you receive. Often, the uplink frequency and downlink frequency are in different
amateur bands.
T8B08
What is meant by the statement that a satellite is operating in U/V mode?
A. The satellite uplink is in the 15 meter band and the downlink is in the 10 meter band
B. The satellite uplink is in the 70 centimeter band and the downlink is in the 2 meter
band
C. The satellite operates using ultraviolet frequencies
D. The satellite frequencies are usually variable
The 70 cm band is in the UHF portion of the spectrum, hence the “U” in U/V, while the 2 meter band
is in the VHF portion of the spectrum, hence the “V” in U/V.
While most satellites are FM satellites, some operate using other modes.
T8B04
What mode of transmission is commonly used by amateur radio satellites?
A. SSB
B. FM
C. CW/data
D. All these choices are correct
When making contacts via an amateur satellite only use as much power as is needed to make the
contact. The reason for this is that when a satellite receives a very strong signal, its automatic gain
control (AGC) sets the receive threshold to the level of that signal and weaker signals won't be relayed.
When everyone uses a reasonable power level, the AGC doesn't kick in, and the satellite can relay many
signals simultaneously.
T8B02
What is the impact of using excessive effective radiated power on a satellite uplink?
A. Possibility of commanding the satellite to an improper mode
B. Blocking access by other users
99
C. Overloading the satellite batteries
D. Possibility of rebooting the satellite control computer
T8B12
Which of the following is a way to determine whether your satellite uplink power is
neither too low nor too high?
A. Check your signal strength report in the telemetry data
B. Listen for distortion on your downlink signal
C. Your signal strength on the downlink should be about the same as the beacon
D. All these choices are correct
Most amateur satellites are in a low Earth orbit, or LEO. Satellites in a low Earth orbit have an altitude
between 99 miles and 1,200 miles. This corresponds to an orbital period of about 88 minutes to about
about 127 minutes. Satellites in LEO provides high bandwidth and low communication time lag, but
they can only be used for a short time when they pass overhead.
T8B10
What is a LEO satellite?
A. A sun synchronous satellite
B. A highly elliptical orbit satellite
C. A satellite in low energy operation mode
D. A satellite in low earth orbit
Amateur satellites are often equipped with beacons. Beacons often send telemetry signals that inform
users about the status of the satellite. Anyone—licensed or not—may receive telemetry from a satellite.
T8B05
What is a satellite beacon?
A. The primary transmit antenna on the satellite
B. An indicator light that shows where to point your antenna
C. A reflective surface on the satellite
D. A transmission from a satellite that contains status information
T8B01
What telemetry information is typically transmitted by satellite beacons?
A. The signal strength of received signals
B. Time of day accurate to plus or minus 1/10 second
C. Health and status of the satellite
D. All these choices are correct
T8B11
Who may receive telemetry from a space station?
A. Anyone
B. A licensed radio amateur with a transmitter equipped for interrogating the satellite
C. A licensed radio amateur who has been certified by the protocol developer
D. A licensed radio amateur who has registered for an access code from AMSAT
100
Computers make it easy to figure out when you can communicate via an amateur satellite. Computer
programs are available that not only tell you when a satellite is passing overhead, but also control an
antenna rotor and set the frequency of your transceiver.
T8B03
Which of the following are provided by satellite tracking programs?
A. Maps showing the real-time position of the satellite track over Earth
B. The time, azimuth, and elevation of the start, maximum altitude, and end of a pass
C. The apparent frequency of the satellite transmission, including effects of Doppler shift
D. All these choices are correct
T8B06
Which of the following are inputs to a satellite tracking program?
A. The satellite transmitted power
B. The Keplerian elements
C. The last observed time of zero Doppler shift
D. All these choices are correct
Two issues that you must deal with when communicating via satellites are Doppler shift and spin
fading.
T8B07
What is Doppler shift in reference to satellite communications?
A. A change in the satellite orbit
B. A mode where the satellite receives signals on one band and transmits on another
C. An observed change in signal frequency caused by relative motion between the
satellite and Earth station
D. A special digital communications mode for some satellites
T8B09
What causes spin fading of satellite signals?
A. Circular polarized noise interference radiated from the sun
B. Rotation of the satellite and its antennas
C. Doppler shift of the received signal
D. Interfering signals within the satellite uplink band
101
Operating activities
There are many different ways to have fun with amateur radio. Contesting is one of them.
T8C03
What operating activity involves contacting as many stations as possible during a
specified period?
A. Simulated emergency exercises
B. Net operations
C. Public service events
D. Contesting
T8C04
Which of the following is good procedure when contacting another station in a
contest?
A. Sign only the last two letters of your call if there are many other stations calling
B. Contact the station twice to be sure that you are in his log
C. Send only the minimum information needed for proper identification and the
contest exchange
D. All these choices are correct
Sending the minimum amount of information will help you make as many contacts as possible.
Information about a station's location is often part of the contest exchange. In the U.S., a station's state
or ARRL section is most often sent, but in VHF/UHF contests, stations often send each other their
grid locators.
T8C05
What is a grid locator?
A. A letter-number designator assigned to a geographic location
B. A letter-number designator assigned to an azimuth and elevation
C. An instrument for neutralizing a final amplifier
D. An instrument for radio direction finding
One activity that is both fun and practical is radio direction finding. You use radio direction finding
equipment and skills to participate in hidden transmitter hunts.
T8C01
Which of the following methods is used to locate sources of noise interference or
jamming?
A. Echolocation
B. Doppler radar
C. Radio direction finding
D. Phase locking
T8C02
Which of these items would be useful for a hidden transmitter hunt?
A. Calibrated SWR meter
B. A directional antenna
102
C. A calibrated noise bridge
D. All these choices are correct
If the only radios that you have are VHF or UHF radios, you might want to look into EchoLink and
the Internet Radio Linking Project (IRLP). Both systems provide a way to communicate with amateurs
far away with a VHF or UHF transceiver by using Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The biggest
difference between IRLP and EchoLink is that a radio is required to access the IRLP network while you
can access the EchoLink network via a computer or mobile device. Because EchoLink has this feature,
you must prove that you are a licensed radio amateur before using EchoLink.
T8C08
What is the Internet Radio Linking Project (IRLP)?
A. A technique to connect amateur radio systems, such as repeaters, via the internet
using Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
B. A system for providing access to websites via amateur radio
C. A system for informing amateurs in real time of the frequency of active DX stations
D. A technique for measuring signal strength of an amateur transmitter via the internet
T8C07
What is Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP)?
A. A set of rules specifying how to identify your station when linked over the internet to
another station
B. A technique employed to “spot” DX stations via the internet
C. A technique for measuring the modulation quality of a transmitter using remote sites
monitored via the internet
D. A method of delivering voice communications over the internet using digital
techniques
T8C10
What is required before using the EchoLink system?
A. Complete the required EchoLink training
B. Purchase a license to use the EchoLink software
C. Register your call sign and provide proof of license
D. All these choices are correct
T8C09
Which of the following protocols enables an amateur station to transmit through a
repeater without using a radio to initiate the transmission?
A. IRLP
B. D-STAR
C. DMR
D. EchoLink
Stations that connect to EchoLink or IRLP are called nodes. You can access a particular node by
punching in the node number on a radio’s keypad. Pressing keys on the keypad generates DTMF (dual
tone, multi-frequency) signals. DTMF signals are comprised of a pair of tones which are unique for
each key.
103
T8C06
How is over the air access to IRLP nodes accomplished?
A. By obtaining a password that is sent via voice to the node
B. By using DTMF signals
C. By entering the proper internet password
D. By using CTCSS tone codes
T2B06
What type of signaling uses pairs of audio tones?
A. DTMF
B. CTCSS
C. GPRS
D. D-STAR
Sometimes, nodes are also gateways.
T8C11
What is an amateur radio station that connects other amateur stations to the internet?
A. A gateway
B. A repeater
C. A digipeater
D. A beacon
104
Rules and regulations
Part 97 definitions, interference, repeater frequency coordinators, and
the ITU
The government agency that is responsible for the Amateur Radio Service in the United States is the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The FCC regulates and enforces the rules which govern
the service in the United States
T1A02 [97.1]
Which agency regulates and enforces the rules for the Amateur Radio Service in the
United States?
A. FEMA
B. Homeland Security
C. The FCC
D. All these choices are correct
Part 97 is the part of the radio regulations that govern the Amateur Radio Service. Part 97.1 lists five
“purposes” for the existence of amateur radio. The first is recognition of its usefulness in providing
emergency and public-service communications. Another is that amateur radio helps people improve
their technical skills and operating skills.
T1A01 [97.1]
Which of the following is part of the Basis and Purpose of the Amateur Radio Service?
A. Providing personal radio communications for as many citizens as possible
B. Providing communications for international non-profit organizations
C. Advancing skills in the technical and communication phases of the radio art
D. All these choices are correct
Part 97 defines terms and concepts that every amateur radio operator needs to know. Specifically, you
need to know the definition of a beacon and a space station.
T1A06 [97.3(a)(9)]
What is the FCC Part 97 definition of a beacon?
A. A government transmitter marking the amateur radio band edges
B. A bulletin sent by the FCC to announce a national emergency
C. A continuous transmission of weather information authorized in the amateur bands by
the National Weather Service
D. An amateur station transmitting communications for the purposes of observing
propagation or related experimental activities
T1A07 [97.3(a)(41)]
What is the FCC Part 97 definition of a space station?
A. Any satellite orbiting Earth
B. A manned satellite orbiting Earth
105
C. An amateur station located more than 50 km above Earth's surface
D. An amateur station using amateur radio satellites for relay of signals
One of the most important concepts defined by Part 97 is that of harmful interference. Part 97 defines
harmful interference as “interference which endangers the functioning of a radionavigation service or of
other safety services or seriously degrades, obstructs or repeatedly interrupts a radiocommunication
service operating in accordance with the Radio Regulations.” Amateur stations can never willfully
interfere with other amateur stations.
T1A11 [97.101 (d)]
When is willful interference to other amateur radio stations permitted?
A. To stop another amateur station that is breaking the FCC rules
B. At no time
C. When making short test transmissions
D. At any time, stations in the Amateur Radio Service are not protected from willful
interference
Part 97 also contains rules about how repeater frequencies are assigned. This responsibility is assigned to
regional frequency coordinators, who are amateur radio operators who volunteer to do this work and are
selected by radio amateurs in that region.
T1A08 [97.3(a)(22)]
Which of the following entities recommends transmit/receive channels and other
parameters for auxiliary and repeater stations?
A. Frequency Spectrum Manager appointed by the FCC
B. Volunteer Frequency Coordinator recognized by local amateurs
C. FCC Regional Field Office
D. International Telecommunication Union
T1A09 [97.3(a)(22)]
Who selects a Frequency Coordinator?
A. The FCC Office of Spectrum Management and Coordination Policy
B. The local chapter of the Office of National Council of Independent Frequency
Coordinators
C. Amateur operators in a local or regional area whose stations are eligible to be
repeater or auxiliary stations
D. FCC Regional Field Office
106
Frequency allocations and power output limits
Because operation outside of the amateur radio bands is a serious offense, it is important to know about
the frequencies that amateur radio operators can use, as well as the modes you can use on those
frequencies.
T1B03 [97.301(a)]
Which frequency is in the 6 meter amateur band?
A. 49.00 MHz
B. 52.525 MHz
C. 28.50 MHz
D. 222.15 MHz
T1B04 [97.301(a)]
Which amateur band includes 146.52 MHz?
A. 6 meters
B. 20 meters
C. 70 centimeters
D. 2 meters
T1B06 [97.301(e), 97.305]
On which HF bands does a Technician class operator have phone privileges?
A. None
B. 10 meter band only
C. 80 meter, 40 meter, 15 meter, and 10 meter bands
D. 30 meter band only
T1B01 [97.301 (e)]
Which of the following frequency ranges are available for phone operation by
Technician licensees?
A. 28.050 MHz to 28.150 MHz
B. 28.100 MHz to 28.300 MHz
C. 28.300 MHz to 28.500 MHz
D. 28.500 MHz to 28.600 MHz
T1B10 [97.305(c)]
Where may SSB phone be used in amateur bands above 50 MHz?
A. Only in sub-bands allocated to General class or higher licensees
B. Only on repeaters
C. In at least some segment of all these bands
D. On any band if the power is limited to 25 watts
T1B07 [97.305(a), (c)]
Which of the following VHF/UHF band segments are limited to CW only?
A. 50.0 MHz to 50.1 MHz and 144.0 MHz to 144.1 MHz
B. 219 MHz to 220 MHz and 420.0 MHz to 420.1 MHz
C. 902.0 MHz to 902.1 MHz
D. All these choices are correct
T1B05 [97.305(c)]
How may amateurs use the 219 to 220 MHz segment of 1.25 meter band?
107
A. Spread spectrum only
B. Fast-scan television only
C. Emergency traffic only
D. Fixed digital message forwarding systems only
T1B09 [97.101(a), 97.301(a-e)]
Why should you not set your transmit frequency to be exactly at the edge of an
amateur band or sub-band?
A. To allow for calibration error in the transmitter frequency display
B. So that modulation sidebands do not extend beyond the band edge
C. To allow for transmitter frequency drift
D. All these choices are correct
Amateur radio operators share some bands with users from other services. Sometimes, amateurs are the
primary users, such as in the 2m band, but sometimes amateur radio operators are secondary users.
When amateurs are secondary users, they must avoid interfering with the primary users.
T1B08 [97.303]
How are US amateurs restricted in segments of bands where the Amateur Radio
Service is secondary?
A. U.S. amateurs may find non-amateur stations in those segments, and must avoid
interfering with them
B. U.S. amateurs must give foreign amateur stations priority in those segments
C. International communications are not permitted in those segments
D. Digital transmissions are not permitted in those segments
Since Technician Class operators have full amateur privileges above 50 MHz, they can operate
transmitters with an output power of up to 1,500 watts at frequencies in the VHF region and above.
On the HF bands, however, transmitters operated by Technicians are restricted to an output power of
200 watts or less.
T1B12 [97.313(b)]
Except for some specific restrictions, what is the maximum peak envelope power
output for Technician class operators using frequencies above 30 MHz?
A. 50 watts
B. 100 watts
C. 500 watts
D. 1500 watts
T1B11 [97.313]
What is the maximum peak envelope power output for Technician class operators in
their HF band segments?
A. 200 watts
B. 100 watts
C. 50 watts
D. 10 watts
108
License classes
As you might expect, licensing is a big deal in the Amateur Radio Service. Your class of license
determines where you can operate, and in some cases, what modes you can operate and how much
power you can use.
While you will find Novice and Advanced Class licensees in the FCC database, only Technician,
General, and Amateur Extra Class licenses are currently available from the FCC.
T1C01 [97.9(a), 97.17(a)]
For which license classes are new licenses currently available from the FCC?
A. Novice, Technician, General, Amateur Extra
B. Technician, Technician Plus, General, Amateur Extra
C. Novice, Technician Plus, General, Advanced
D. Technician, General, Amateur Extra
After you pass the test, the FCC will send you an email notifying you how to pay the $35 license fee.
Once you pay that fee, they will assign you a call sign and enter your information into the license
database. The normal term for an FCC-issued amateur radio license is ten years. As soon as your
operator/station license grant appears in the FCC’s license database, you may transmit on the amateur
bands.
T1C08 [97.25]
What is the normal term for an FCC-issued amateur radio license?
A. Five years
B. Life
C. Ten years
D. Eight years
T1C10 [97.5a]
How soon after passing the examination for your first amateur radio license may you
transmit on the amateur radio bands?
A. Immediately on receiving your Certificate of Successful Completion of Examination
(CSCE)
B. As soon as your operator/station license grant appears on the ARRL website
C. As soon as your operator/station license grant appears in the FCC’s license database
D. As soon as you receive your license in the mail from the FCC
T1A04 [97.5(b)(1)]
How many operator/primary station license grants may be held by any one person?
A. One
B. No more than two
C. One for each band on which the person plans to operate
D. One for each permanent station location from which the person plans to operate
For some time now, the official amateur radio license authorization has been the electronic record that
exists in the FCC Universal Licensing System (ULS). Paper licenses are no longer issued as a matter of
course, although you can log into the FCC website and print out a paper copy if you so choose.
109
T1A05 [97.7]
What proves that the FCC has issued an operator/primary license grant?
A. A printed copy of the certificate of successful completion of examination
B. An email notification from the NCVEC granting the license
C. The license appears in the FCC ULS database
D. All these choices are correct
After you pass the test, the FCC will assign you a call sign sequentially from the pool of available call
signs. If you do not like this call sign, you can apply for a vanity call sign.
T1C02 [97.19]
Who may select a desired call sign under the vanity call sign rules?
A. Only a licensed amateur with a General or Amateur Extra Class license
B. Only a licensed amateur with an Amateur Extra Class license
C. Only a licensed amateur who has been licensed continuously for more than 10 years
D. Any licensed amateur
The call sign you select must not only be available, it must have an appropriate format for the class of
license you hold. For example, only Amateur Extra class licensees may hold 1x2 or 2x1 call signs. This
means that a Technician class amateur radio operator may not choose the call signs KA1X, which is a
2x1 call sign, or W1XX, which is a 1x2 call sign.
T1C05
Which of the following is a valid Technician class call sign format?
A. KF1XXX
B. KA1X
C. W1XX
D. All these choices are correct
If you don’t renew your license before it expires, or within the two-year grace period, you will have to
take the test again to get a new amateur radio license.
T1C09 [97.21(a)(b)]
What is the grace period for renewal if an amateur license expires?
A. Two years
B. Three years
C. Five years
D. Ten years
T1C11 [97.21(b)]
If your license has expired and is still within the allowable grace period, may you
continue to transmit on the amateur radio bands?
A. Yes, for up to two years
B. Yes, as soon as you apply for renewal
C. Yes, for up to one year
D. No, you must wait until the license has been renewed
110
Clubs may apply for a station license for their club station, if the club has at least four members. The
club may even apply for a vanity call sign.
T1F11 [97.5(b)(2)]
Which of the following is a requirement for the issuance of a club station license grant?
A. The trustee must have an Amateur Extra Class operator license grant
B. The club must have at least four members
C. The club must be registered with the American Radio Relay League
D. All these choices are correct
As of December 2020, applicants for an amateur radio license must provide a valid email address.
Should you change that email address, you must inform the FCC of your new address. If the FCC is
unable to contact you at the email address on file, they may revoke your license.
T1C04 [97.23]
What may happen if the FCC is unable to reach you by email?
A. Fine and suspension of operator license
B. Revocation of the station license or suspension of the operator license
C. Revocation of access to the license record in the FCC system
D. Nothing; there is no such requirement
T1C07 [97.23]
Which of the following can result in revocation of the station license or suspension of
the operator license?
A. Failure to inform the FCC of any changes in the amateur station following performance
of an RF safety environmental evaluation
B. Failure to provide and maintain a correct email address with the FCC
C. Failure to obtain FCC type acceptance prior to using a home-built transmitter
D. Failure to have a copy of your license available at your station
A question that sometimes arises is what regulations apply in international waters. The answer is that
you can operate your station while aboard a ship in international waters if that ship is documented or
registered in the United States.
T1C06 [97.5(a)(2)]
From which of the following locations may an FCC-licensed amateur station transmit?
A. From within any country that belongs to the International Telecommunication Union
B. From within any country that is a member of the United Nations
C. From anywhere within International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Regions 2 and 3
D. From any vessel or craft located in international waters and documented or
registered in the United States
111
Authorized and prohibited transmissions
As a licensed radio amateur, it’s important to know what you can and can’t do on the air. Indecent
language is prohibited, and oddly enough, so is music, except for one specific situation.
T1D06 [97.113(a)(4)]
What, if any, are the restrictions concerning transmission of language that may be
considered indecent or obscene?
A. The FCC maintains a list of words that are not permitted to be used on amateur
frequencies
B. Any such language is prohibited
C. The ITU maintains a list of words that are not permitted to be used on amateur
frequencies
D. There is no such prohibition
T1D04 [97.113(a)(4), 97.113(c)]
Under what conditions is an amateur station authorized to transmit music using a
phone emission?
A. When incidental to an authorized retransmission of manned spacecraft
communications
B. When the music produces no spurious emissions
C. When transmissions are limited to less than three minutes per hour
D. When the music is transmitted above 1280 MHz
Transmitting any codes whose specifications are not published or well-known is prohibited, except
when transmitting control commands to space stations or radio control craft. What this means in
practice is that encryption is not allowed on the amateur radio bands,
T1D03 [97.211(b), 97.215(b), 97.113(a)(4)]
When is it permissible to transmit messages encoded to obscure their meaning?
A. Only during contests
B. Only when transmitting certain approved digital codes
C. Only when transmitting control commands to space stations or radio control craft
D. Never
Amateur radio stations may only communicate with amateur stations in other countries when that
country allows it.
T1D01 [97.111(a)(1)]
With which countries are FCC-licensed amateur radio stations prohibited from
exchanging communications?
A. Any country whose administration has notified the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) that it objects to such communications
B. Any country whose administration has notified the American Radio Relay League
(ARRL) that it objects to such communications
C. Any country banned from such communications by the International Amateur Radio
112
Union (IARU)
D. Any country banned from making such communications by the American Radio Relay
League (ARRL)
Currently, there are no countries that U.S. amateurs are prohibited from contacting, but I’m going to
guess that there are no licensed radio amateurs in North Korea.
Another big deal in amateur radio is the prohibition of being paid to operate an amateur radio station,
except in some very special circumstances. That doesn't mean that you can't make money from amateur
radio. I’m obviously making a few bucks by selling study guides, but I can't be paid for operating my
station or someone else's station.
T1D08 [97.113(a)(3)(iii)]
In which of the following circumstances may the control operator of an amateur
station receive compensation for operating that station?
A. When the communication is related to the sale of amateur equipment by the control
operator's employer
B. When the communication is incidental to classroom instruction at an educational
institution
C. When the communication is made to obtain emergency information for a local
broadcast station
D. All these choices are correct
T1D05 [97.113(a)(3)(ii)]
When may amateur radio operators use their stations to notify other amateurs of the
availability of equipment for sale or trade?
A. Never
B. When the equipment is not the personal property of either the station licensee, or the
control operator, or their close relatives
C. When no profit is made on the sale
D. When selling amateur radio equipment and not on a regular basis
Amateur radio stations may not broadcast. The FCC defines broadcasting as one-way transmissions
intended for the general public.
T1D10 [97.3(a)(10)]
How does the FCC define broadcasting for the Amateur Radio Service?
A. Two-way transmissions by amateur stations
B. Any transmission made by the licensed station
C. Transmission of messages directed only to amateur operators
D. Transmissions intended for reception by the general public
T1D02 [97.113(b), 97.111(b)]
Under which of the following circumstances are one-way transmissions by an amateur
station prohibited?
A. In all circumstances
113
B. Broadcasting
C. International Morse Code Practice
D. Telecommand or transmissions of telemetry
Amateurs may, however, transmit information for broadcast by broadcast stations in an emergency
situation.
T1D09 [97.113(5)(b)]
When may amateur stations transmit information in support of broadcasting, program
production, or news gathering, assuming no other means is available?
A. When such communications are directly related to the immediate safety of human
life or protection of property
B. When broadcasting communications to or from the space shuttle
C. Where noncommercial programming is gathered and supplied exclusively to the
National Public Radio network
D. Never
So, what is allowed? Well, for one thing, you can talk about amateur radio and other personal topics
when making an international contact.
T1C03 [97.117]
What types of international communications are an FCC-licensed amateur radio
station permitted to make?
A. Communications incidental to the purposes of the Amateur Radio Service and
remarks of a personal character
B. Communications incidental to conducting business or remarks of a personal nature
C. Only communications incidental to contest exchanges; all other communications are
prohibited
D. Any communications that would be permitted by an international broadcast station
114
Control operator and control types
An important concept in amateur radio is the control operator. The basic concept is that an amateur
radio station must always have a control operator, and that control operator is responsible for the
proper operation of that station. And, the default control operator is the station licensee.
T1E01 [97.7(a)]
When may an amateur station transmit without a control operator?
A. When using automatic control, such as in the case of a repeater
B. When the station licensee is away and another licensed amateur is using the station
C. When the transmitting station is an auxiliary station
D. Never
T1E11 [97.103(a)]
Who does the FCC presume to be the control operator of an amateur station, unless
documentation to the contrary is in the station records?
A. The station custodian
B. The third party participant
C. The person operating the station equipment
D. The station licensee
T1E03 [97.103(b)]
Who must designate the station control operator?
A. The station licensee
B. The FCC
C. The frequency coordinator
D. Any licensed operator
T1E07 (D) [97.103(a)]
When the control operator is not the station licensee, who is responsible for the proper
operation of the station?
A. All licensed amateurs who are present at the operation
B. Only the station licensee
C. Only the control operator
D. The control operator and the station licensee
T1F10 [97.205(g)]
Who is accountable if a repeater inadvertently retransmits communications that
violate the FCC rules?
A. The control operator of the originating station
B. The control operator of the repeater
C. The owner of the repeater
D. Both the originating station and the repeater owner
T1E04 [97.103(b)]
What determines the transmitting frequency privileges of an amateur station?
A. The frequency authorized by the frequency coordinator
B. The frequencies printed on the license grant
C. The highest class of operator license held by anyone on the premises
D. The class of operator license held by the control operator
115
T1E06 [97.301]
When, under normal circumstances, may a Technician class licensee be the control
operator of a station operating in an Amateur Extra Class band segment?
A. At no time
B. When designated as the control operator by an Amateur Extra Class licensee
C. As part of a multi-operator contest team
D. When using a club station whose trustee holds an Amateur Extra Class license
T1E02 [97.301, 97.207(c)]
Who may be the control operator of a station communicating through an amateur
satellite or space station?
A. Only an Amateur Extra Class operator
B. A General class or higher licensee with a satellite operator certification
C. Only an Amateur Extra Class operator who is also an AMSAT member
D. Any amateur allowed to transmit on the satellite uplink frequency
Two related concepts are the control point and control type. Part 97 defines three control types:
• Local control. A station is said to be locally controlled when the control operator can directly
manipulate the controls of an amateur radio station.
• Remote control. A station is said to be remotely controlled when the control operator indirectly
manipulates the operating controls of an amateur radio station through a control link, such as a
radio link, a telephone link, or an internet link.
• Automatic control. A station is said to be automatically controlled if it uses devices and
procedures for control without the control operator being present at the control point.
The control point is where the control function is being performed. For example, the control point of a
station that is being locally controlled is wherever the station and operator are located. The control
point of a remotely-controlled station is wherever the control operator is located, which could be
anywhere in the world, if the operator is controlling the station over the internet.
T1E05 [97.3(a)(14)]
What is an amateur station’s control point?
A. The location of the station’s transmitting antenna
B. The location of the station’s transmitting apparatus
C. The location at which the control operator function is performed
D. The mailing address of the station licensee
T1E10 [97.3(a)(39)]
Which of the following is an example of remote control as defined in Part 97?
A. Repeater operation
B. Operating the station over the internet
C. Controlling a model aircraft, boat, or car by amateur radio
D. All these choices are correct
T1E09 [97.109(c)]
116
Which of the following are required for remote control operation?
A. The control operator must be at the control point
B. A control operator is required at all times
C. The control operator must indirectly manipulate the controls
D. All these choices are correct
T1E08 [97.3(a)(6), 97.205(d)]
Which of the following is an example of automatic control?
A. Repeater operation
B. Controlling a station over the internet
C. Using a computer or other device to send CW automatically
D. Using a computer or other device to identify automatically
117
Station identification, repeaters, third-party communications, FCC
inspection
Proper station identification is also very important. In fact, failure to identify properly is perhaps the
most common rule violation.
T1F03 [97.119(a)]
When are you required to transmit your assigned call sign?
A. At the beginning of each contact, and every 10 minutes thereafter
B. At least once during each transmission
C. At least every 15 minutes during and at the end of a communication
D. At least every 10 minutes during and at the end of a communication
T1D11 [97.119(a)]
When may an amateur station transmit without identifying on the air?
A. When the transmissions are of a brief nature to make station adjustments
B. When the transmissions are unmodulated
C. When the transmitted power level is below 1 watt
D. When transmitting signals to control model craft
T1F04 [97.119(b)(2)]
What language may you use for identification when operating in a phone sub-band?
A. Any language recognized by the United Nations
B. Any language recognized by the ITU
C. English
D. English, French, or Spanish
T1F05 [97.119(b)(2)]
What method of call sign identification is required for a station transmitting phone
signals?
A. Send the call sign followed by the indicator RPT
B. Send the call sign using a CW or phone emission
C. Send the call sign followed by the indicator R
D. Send the call sign using only a phone emission
T1A03 [97.119(b)(2)]
What do the FCC rules state regarding the use of a phonetic alphabet for station
identification in the Amateur Radio Service?
A. It is required when transmitting emergency messages
B. It is encouraged
C. It is required when in contact with foreign stations
D. All these choices are correct
For some types of operations, using a tactical call is allowed. A tactical call describes the function of the
station or the location of a station, such as “Race Headquarters.” You do, however, still have to identify
using your FCC-assigned call sign every ten minutes or at the end of a communication.
T1F02 [97.119 (a)]
How often must you identify with your FCC-assigned call sign when using tactical call
signs such as “Race Headquarters”?
118
A. Never, the tactical call is sufficient
B. Once during every hour
C. At the end of each communication and every ten minutes during a communication
D. At the end of every transmission
When operating mobile or portable, or when you wish to note something about your station, you may
use a self-assigned call sign indicator, such as “/3,” “mobile,” or “QRP.”
T1F06 [97.119(c)]
Which of the following self-assigned indicators are acceptable when using a phone
transmission?
A. KL7CC stroke W3
B. KL7CC slant W3
C. KL7CC slash W3
D. All these choices are correct
Third-party communications are communications on behalf of someone who is not the station licensee.
For example, if you have a friend over to your house and let him or her talk on your radio, that is a
third-party communication. These are entirely legal within the United States, but there are some
restrictions when you are in contact with an amateur station in a foreign country.
T1F08 [97.3(a)(47)]
What is the definition of third party communications?
A. A message from a control operator to another amateur station control operator on
behalf of another person
B. Amateur radio communications where three stations are in communications with one
another
C. Operation when the transmitting equipment is licensed to a person other than the
control operator
D. Temporary authorization for an unlicensed person to transmit on the amateur bands for
technical experiments
T1F07 (B) [97.115(a)(2)]
Which of the following restrictions apply when a non-licensed person is allowed to
speak to a foreign station using a station under the control of a licensed amateur
operator?
A. The person must be a U.S. citizen
B. The foreign station must be in a country with which the U.S. has a third party
agreement
C. The licensed control operator must do the station identification
D. All these choices are correct
Finally—and I do mean finally.
T1F01 [97.103(c)]
119
When must the station and its records be available for FCC inspection?
A. At any time ten days after notification by the FCC of such an inspection
B. At any time upon request by an FCC representative
C. At any time after written notification by the FCC of such inspection
D. Only when presented with a valid warrant by an FCC official or government agent
They’re not going to knock on your door at 3 a.m. some morning to take a look at your shack, but one
of your obligations as a licensee is to make your station and your records available when requested to do
so.
Well, that's it! We've covered all 413 questions in the Technician Class question pool. Now, you
should take some online practice tests, and when you're passing those regularly, find an exam session
and get your license. Good luck and 73!
120
Glossary
AC: alternating current. Alternating current is the name for current that reverses direction on a regular
basis. The power outlets in your home provide alternating current.
APRS: Automatic Packet Reporting System. APRS is digital communications system used by amateur
radio operators. While it is normally used for tracking the location of mobile stations, it can be used for
other purposes as well. For more information, go to http://www.aprs.org.
ARES: Amateur Radio Emergency Service. The Amateur Radio Emergency Service consists of licensed
amateurs who have voluntarily registered their qualifications and equipment with their local ARES
leadership for communications duty in the public service when disaster strikes. For more information,
go to http://www.arrl.org/ares.
AM: amplitude modulation. The type of modulation that varies the amplitude of a radio signal in
accordance with the amplitude of a modulating signal. For more information, go to
http://www.pa2old.nl/files/am_fundamentals.pdf.
band plan: plan showing how frequencies within a particular amateur radio band are assigned to
different modes so that operators may avoid interfering with one another.
beam antenna: directional antenna.
CTCSS: Continuous Tone Coded Squelch System. A system that uses sub-audible tones, transmitted
along with the audio portion of a transmission to control whether or not a repeater will re-transmit a
signal. It is known by a number of different trade names, including Private Line® (PL) by Motorola. In
practice, it’s used to prevent nearby transmitters from inadvertently turning on repeaters.
CW: continuous wave. This is the operating mode amateur radio operators use when sending Morse
Code.
DC: direct current. Direct current is the name for current that never reverses direction.
Digital Mobile Radio: radio standard for time-division multiplexing two digital voice signals on a 12.5
KHz repeater channel.
DMR: Digital Mobile Radio
DTMF: dual-tone, multi-frequency. DTMF is a type of signaling used to send data over voice channels.
Its most common use in amateur radio is to allow users of handheld transceivers to send commands to
repeater systems. It is called DTMF because every time a user presses a keypad button a unique tone
consisting of two frequencies is transmitted. For more information, see
http://www.genave.com/dtmf.htm.
EchoLink: system that links amateur radio stations and computing devices using Voice over IP
(VOIP).
electromotive force (EMF): force that propels electric charge through a conductor or circuit; expressed
121
in volts (V).
FCC: Federal Communications Commission. This is the government body which sets the rules for
amateur radio in the U.S.
feed line: wire or cable that carries signals from a transmitter to an antenna or from an antenna to a
receiver.
FM: frequency modulation. The type of modulation normally used when operating on VHF and UHF
repeaters.
FT8: data transmission protocols designed for very weak signal communication.
HF: high frequency. The range of frequencies between 3 MHz and 30 MHz.
HT: handy-talky or handheld transceiver. “Handy Talky” is a Motorola trademark.
ITU: International Telecommunications Union. This is the international body which governs amateur
radio worldwide.
LSB: lower sideband. See SSB.
MFSK: multi-frequency shift keying. A type of modulation used to send digital information over a
radio channel.
PL: Private Line. See CTCSS.
PL-259: male connector often used to connect feedlines to a radio.
polarization: orientation of the electric field a radio wave.
PSK: phase shift keying. A method for sending digital information over a radio channel. A popular
amateur radio “digital mode” is PSK31, which uses PSK modulation and occupies only 31 Hz of
bandwidth.
PTT: push-to-talk
RACES: Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service. RACES is an amateur radio emergency
communications service created by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the FCC.
RACES volunteers serve their respective jurisdictions pursuant to guidelines and mandates established
by local emergency management officials. See http://www.usraces.org/ for more information.
RIT: receiver incremental tuning. A control which allows a user to set the receive frequency of a
transceiver either slightly higher or slightly lower than the transmit frequency.
RF: radio frequency
SSB: single sideband. When a carrier is amplitude modulated, both upper and lower sidebands are
produced. This results in a signal that is 6 kHz wide. Since both sidebands carry the same information,
and the carrier carries no information, someone figured out that if they could filter out the carrier and
one of the sidebands, and put all the power into a single sideband, the efficiency of voice
122
communications would be much greater. Nearly all voice communications on the shortwave bands now
use SSB.
SWR: standing-wave ratio. The SWR of an antenna system is a measure of how closely the impedances
of the antenna and feedline match the output impedance of the transmitter.
talk group: virtual channel that connects amateur radio operators through a repeater or over the
internet.
VHF: very high frequency. The range of frequencies between 30 MHz and 300 MHz.
ULS: Universal Licensing System. The FCC’s Universal Licensing system contains information on all
FCC licensees, including amateur radio operators. For more information, go to http://www.fcc.gov/uls.
UHF: ultra high frequency. The range of frequencies between 300 MHz and 3000 MHz. 41
USB: upper sideband. See SSB.
VFO: variable frequency oscillator. VFOs are used to control the receiving and transmitting frequencies
of amateur radio equipment.
WSJT, WSJT-X: amateur radio software developed by Joe Taylor, K1JT, that supports weak-signal and
low-power digital communication modes, such as JT65, JT4, JT9, and QRA64 (EME); FSK441and
JTMS (meteor scatter); JT6M and ISCAT (ionospheric scatter), and FT8 and FT4.
123
About the Author
I have been a ham radio operator since 1971 and a radio enthusiast as long as I can remember. I’ve been
teaching ham radio classes for the past twenty years. For more information on my classes, go to my
website, https://kb6nu.com. In addition to being an amateur radio instructor:
I have written study guides for the General Class and Extra Class exams. You can find the No-
Nonsense General Class License Study Guide and the No-Nonsense Extra Class License Study Guide
in PDF, Nook (ePub) and Kindle (.mobi) formats on my website at
http://www.kb6nu.com/study-guides. It's also available in print from Amazon.
Who are you? I am the author of 21 Ways to Go outside a book for those who have autism
been recently licensed or are just getting back into the hobby. It's also available in PDF, Nook
(ePub) and Kindle (.mobi) formats on my website at http://www.kb6nu.com/product/21-
things-to-do-after-you-get-your-amateur-radio-license-pdf/. It's also available in print from
Amazon.
• I am the author of The CW Geek's Guide to Having Fun with Morse Code, a book for those
wanting to learn the art of Morse Code. It's also available in PDF, Nook (ePub) and Kindle
(.mobi) formats on my website at https://www.kb6nu.com/product/cw-geeks-guide-to-having-
fun-with-morse-code-pdf/. It's also available in print from Amazon.
You can contact me by sending e-mail to me. If you have comments or questions
about any of the material in this book, I hope you will do so.
73!


is noah dumb yes he is



THE BEGINNER’S
HANDBOOK OF
AMATEUR RADIO
This page intentionally left blank.
THE BEGINNER’S
HANDBOOK OF
AMATEUR RADIO
Clay Laster, W5ZPV
FOURTH EDITION
McGraw-Hill
New York San Francisco Washington, D.C. Auckland Bogotá
Caracas Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan
Montreal New Delhi San Juan Singapore
Sydney Tokyo Toronto
Copyright © 2001 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except as per-
mitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-136187-1.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trade-
marked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringe-
ment of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate
training programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212)
904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the
work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and
retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works
based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior con-
sent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your
right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES
AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE
WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR
OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its
licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will
be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error
or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the con-
tent of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any
indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even
if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause what-
soever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
abcMcGraw-Hill
0-07-139550-4
DOI: 10.1036/0071395504
Preface xv
Introduction xvii
Acknowledgments xix
Chapter 1 Introduction to Amateur Radio 1
Who Can Become a Ham Radio Operator? 1
New Avenues into Amateur Radio 2
About Amateur Radio 2
A History of Amateur Radio 3
Early pioneers 3
Beginning of amateur radio 5
First licenses for amateur radio operators 7
The death knell for amateur radio 8
The golden age of amateur radio 9
Amateur Radio—A Scientific Hobby 11
Amateur Radio Public Service 12
The Path into Amateur Radio—The Technician
Class License 15
Chapter 2 How to Prepare for the FCC Technician Class
Examination 19
The Federal Communications Commission 21
The FCC Volunteer Examiner Program 22
FCC Amateur Radio Operating Classes 22
The Amateur Radio Frequency Spectrum 23
C O N T E N T S
v
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
vi CONTENTS
FCC Rules and Regulations 25
Part 97: Amateur Radio Service 25
Amateur Call-Sign Allocations 55
How to Learn International Morse Code 58
What is Morse Code? 58
How code is transmitted 59
Who can learn Morse code? 61
The FCC Written Examinations 67
The VEC question pool 67
Scheduling the examination 69
Taking the examination 69
Chapter 3 Radio Communications Theory 71
Definitions 71
The Radio Circuit—Transmitter to Receiver 73
The Electromagnetic Spectrum 74
Frequency and wavelength 76
The radio frequency spectrum 78
Wave propagation 80
Types of Propagation 80
The Effects of the Ionosphere on Radio
Communications 82
Ionospheric layers 83
Sunspots affect the ionosphere 83
High sunspot activity 84
Propagation characteristics of the ionosphere 85
Nighttime propagation conditions 87
Chapter 4 Principles of Electricity and Magnetism 89
Definitions 89
Fundamentals of Electricity 91
Atoms and matter 92
Negative and positive charges 93
Electricity—the flow of electrons 93
Units of voltage and current 94
CONTENTS vii
Conductors and insulators 95
Resistance and resistors 95
Some Basic Electrical Laws 98
Ohm’s law 99
Resistors in series 100
Resistors in parallel 100
Series-parallel combinations 101
Current flow in series dc circuits 101
IR voltage drops 104
Current flow in parallel dc circuits 105
Magnetism 106
The magnetic field 106
Temporary and permanent magnets 107
Electromagnetism 107
Magnetomotive force (MMF) 108
Electromagnetic induction 109
Alternating current and voltage 109
The ac sine wave 109
ac circuits 111
Capacitors and Capacitance 112
How capacitors work 114
Capacitor voltage ratings 115
Connecting capacitors in parallel 115
Connecting capacitors in series 116
Capacitive reactance 116
Phase angle of capacitors 118
Testing capacitors 118
Inductors and Inductance 119
Inductance 119
Series inductors 121
Parallel inductors 121
Inductive reactance, XL 123
Phase angle of inductors 123
Transformers 124
Basic transformer concepts 125
Testing inductors and transformers with
a multimeter 127
viii CONTENTS
ac Circuit Analysis 128
Impedance and phase angles 128
Resonance and tuned circuits 129
The Q of resonant circuits 131
Power Relationships 131
Power in a dc circuit 132
Power in an ac circuit 132
Maximum power transfer 134
Chapter 5 Tubes and Semiconductors 135
Definitions 137
Vacuum Tubes 139
Thermionic Emission 139
General Types of Vacuum Tubes 141
Diodes 141
The diode as an ac rectifier 143
Triodes 144
How triodes work 145
Triode amplification action 147
Limitations of triodes 148
Tetrodes and Pentodes 149
The tetrode 149
Limitations of the tetrode 150
The pentode 151
The pentode as an amplifier 152
Beam-power tubes 153
Gas-filled tubes 153
Cathode-ray tubes 154
Diodes, Transistors, and Other Semiconductor
Devices 154
n-type semiconductor 156
p-type semiconductor 156
How semiconductor devices are made 156
The pn junction 157
How diodes work 160
Reverse bias 161
Diode circuits 162
CONTENTS ix
Special-Purpose Diodes 164
The zener diode 165
The varactor diode 166
Transistors 166
Bipolar transistor construction 169
npn transistor operation 169
pnp transistor operation 171
Common-base amplifying circuits 171
Common-emitter amplifier circuits 174
Common-emitter design considerations 176
Variations in transistor characteristics 179
Voltage gain of common-emitter amplifier
circuits 180
Frequency limitations of transistors 181
The common-collector configuration 182
Summary of transistor characteristics 184
Transistor testing 184
Transistor testing with ohmmeters 185
Field-Effect Transistors 187
The junction field-effect transistor 188
Characteristics of junction field-effect transistors 189
JFET circuit configurations 190
Insulated-gate field-effect transistors 192
Depletion-mode IGFET operation 192
Enhancement-mode insulated-gate field-effect
transistors 194
Care and handling of insulated-gate
semiconductor devices 196
Optoelectronic Devices 197
Photodiodes 198
Light-emitting diodes 199
LCD displays 199
Integrated Circuits 200
Types of integrated circuits 200
A typical IC—the 555 timer 202
Packaging of integrated circuits 202
Linear and digital integrated circuits 202
x CONTENTS
Chapter 6 Power Supplies 205
Definitions 206
Power-Supply Design Considerations 209
The power transformer 209
Rectifier circuits 210
Filter circuits 213
Electronic voltage regulators 218
A word of caution 223
Chapter 7 Electronic Circuits 227
Definitions 227
Audio- and Radio-Frequency Amplifiers 232
Basic Types of Amplifiers 234
The ideal amplifier 234
The Decibel 236
Voltage and Current Ratios in Decibels 239
Amplifier Power Levels 242
Class-A, -B, -AB, and -C Amplifiers 243
Amplifier Efficiency of Operation 244
Interstage Coupling Techniques 245
Direct coupling 245
Resistance-capacitance (RC) coupling 247
Transformer coupling 247
Impedance coupling 247
Push-Pull Operation 248
Integrated-Circuit Amplifiers 249
An IC Audio Amplifier for the Ham Shack 250
The Oscillator: An Amplifier with Feedback 253
The Basic Oscillator Circuit 254
Oscillator Characteristics 255
The Tuned LC Oscillator 255
Oscillator Circuits 257
Chapter 8 Introduction to Radio Transmitters 269
Definitions 272
The CW Transmitter 275
CONTENTS xi
The Master Oscillator Power Amplifier Transmitter 276
Amplitude-Modulated Transmitters 280
Conventional AM transmitters 280
AM carrier and sideband signals 282
Single-Sideband Modulation 283
Frequency Modulation 288
FM transmitters 289
Transmitter Performance Tests 290
Transmitter frequency measurements 290
Frequency counters 291
Transmitter power measurements 292
Chapter 9 Introduction to Radio Receivers 295
Definitions 297
Receiver Basics 298
Reception 299
Selection or selectivity 300
Demodulation or detection 301
Reproduction 302
Simple Receivers 302
Tuned radio-frequency (TRF) receivers 302
Direct-conversion receivers 303
The Superheterodyne Receiver 305
RF amplifiers 307
Local oscillators 307
Mixers 309
Regenerative-detector receivers 310
IF amplifiers 310
Detectors and beat-frequency oscillators 312
Automatic gain control 312
S meters 313
Interference and Receiver Limitations 313
Receiver Overload 314
Harmonic Signals 315
Constructing the “Sudden” 160- to 20-Meter Direct
Conversion Receiver 315
FM Receivers 319
xii CONTENTS
Chapter 10 All about Transmission Lines and Antennas 323
Definitions 324
Transmission Line Basics 326
Types of Transmission Lines 327
Twin-lead lines 327
Coaxial transmission lines 328
Standing Waves 329
Standing-wave ratios 329
High-Frequency Antennas 332
Half-wave doublet (or dipole) antenna 333
Safety and other considerations 340
Multiband antennas 347
Vertical antennas 350
Beam antennas 351
Station Wiring Diagrams 355
Chapter 11 RF Radiation Safety and Radio
Communications Practices and Procedures 357
Definitions 357
Radio Frequency Environmental Safety Practices 361
Determining Compliance with FCC RF Safety Rules
and Regulations 365
General RF safety recommendations 367
Radio Communications Practices 368
Station installation 368
Station layout 369
Station wiring 370
Radio-Frequency Interference (RFI) 371
Elimination of RFI 371
How to Use Test Equipment 373
Meter movements 373
Ammeters 374
Voltmeters 374
Ohmmeters 375
CONTENTS xiii
The multimeter 377
Wattmeters 377
Operating Procedures 377
Operating courtesy 378
CW or telegraph procedures 379
Q signals 379
The RST signal-reporting system 380
Prosigns and standard abbreviations 380
A Typical Contact on the Technician Bands 380
Appendix A. Element 2—Technician Class
Examination Question Pool 385
Answers 481
Appendix B. The W5YI RF Safety Tables 485
Index 491
This page intentionally left blank.
Welcome to the world of amateur radio! We (the term “we” applies not
only to myself, but to all the pioneering hams who helped to make
amateur radio available to everyone) prepared this book with two major
objectives in mind. First, we want to introduce you to the exciting world
of amateur radio, one of the most interesting and challenging hobbies
available today. Once you’re hooked, our second objective is help
prepare you for the FCC Technician Class license examinations,
including both theory and Morse code. There is also another important
objective: enticing the many dedicated electronics and computer
experimenters, technicians, engineers, and serious CB enthusiasts
throughout the country to join the ranks of amateur radio operators.
In no other hobby can one find such a diversity of individual and
group endeavors involving scientific study and experimentation. The
fields of amateur radio range from basic electronics, voice and data com-
munications on a local and world-wide basis, and space and satellite
communications to public service (especially during emergencies) and
close camaraderie or friendships that last a lifetime. Truly, amateur
radio is one of the largest fraternities in the world, open to persons of all
ages and nationalities. The No-Code Technician Class license—yes, at
last an amateur radio license with no Morse code examination—makes
it easy for you to become a ham operator in a minimum of time. Then to
earn hf Morse code and single-sideband voice privileges in selected hf
bands, you need only to pass a 5 words-per-minute Morse code test.
We’ll show you how to study for and pass both the Technician written
examination and the Morse code test.
This book is designed for either self-study or group use in Technician
Class code and theory classes. The only additional material needed is a
source of Morse code practice signals (cassettes or CDs) and a telegraph
key/code oscillator for generating Morse code signals. Also, excellent PC
xv
P R E F A C E
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
xvi PREFACE
and other home computer educational programs for both Morse code and
theory instruction are available.
Chapters 1 and 2 provide an introduction to amateur radio, the FCC
Part 97 Rules and Regulations for amateur radio, and how to prepare for
and take the Technician Class license code and theory examinations.
Chapters 3 through 10 form the basis for a “mini-course” in electronics
technology, with emphasis on radio communications. Chapter 11 pro-
vides specific and technical information on amateur radio operating
procedures, rf radiation safety requirements, and advanced amateur
radio communications systems involving single sideband, frequency
modulation, repeaters, digital and packet communications, and space
and satellite communications. The appendices contain the FCC Tech-
nician question pool, as well as answers for each question. Sounds
easy, doesn’t it? All it takes on your part is a concentrated study effort
to prepare for and pass the FCC license examinations.
We suggest that you review this book, chapter by chapter, before
starting a detailed study of the course material. This will give you an
overall perspective on amateur radio and help you develop a study
schedule. Finally, review the question pool in Appendix A. One
proven study technique is to write each FCC question on a 3-inch ref-
erence card, and your answer on the back. Check your answer against
the correct answer given in the appendix. The writing of the questions
and digging out the correct answers is part of the learning process. As
you write each question on the card, you also help to write the question
in your memory. To complete this process, review the set of cards until
you learn the correct answers to all questions for each required license
class examination. Remember, passing the Morse code examination
requires a code speed proficiency of at least five words per minute.
Build up this code speed before the end of your studies. With these fac-
tors in mind, you can develop a realistic schedule for preparing for the
FCC Technician code and theory examinations.
One final recommendation: contact the local amateur radio club or
a neighborhood ham and make arrangements for a volunteer examiner
(VE) to administer the FCC Technician Class license examinations.
Finding a ham in the neighborhood is easy—just check with the local
radio club or the volunteer examiner before taking the examinations.
Good luck!
Clay Laster
Do you want to learn all about amateur radio? How to prepare for
the FCC license examinations, all about radio communications
and electronics principles, how personal computers can be used to
enhance the learning, as well as the operation, of amateur radio
comunications, how to assemble and operate an amateur radio “ham”
station? This is one of the most comprehensive books for the beginner
in amateur radio. It combines theory and practice in a clear and easy-
to-understand manner. The many illustrations and photographs make
learning all about amateur radio easy and exciting. The book contains
complete information on how to study for the Technician Class license
examinations and includes all of the FCC test questions and answers.
A variety of construction projects, transmitters, receivers, and other
electronic equipment are examined to give the beginner practical
experience in designing and building amateur radio projects. The book
also provides parts and source information for radio components,
equipment, and antennas, all typical of current-day technology. This
book is unique in that technical information concerning vacuum tubes
and associated circuits are covered. Why are these obsolete devices
covered in a modern book? Many excellent vacuum-tube amateur
receivers, transmitters, and transceivers are to be found at ham
swapfests and conventions. Also, many kilowatt final power ampli-
fiers for amateur hf service are marketed by amateur suppliers today.
Anyone interested in amateur radio—student, electronics or CB
enthusiast, personal computer buff, doctor, lawyer, or engineer—will
want to explore this worldwide hobby. This book offers you the oppor-
tunity to get in on the ground floor of amateur radio.
xvii
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
This page intentionally left blank.
The author is grateful for the cooperation and assistance extended by
individuals, companies, and amateur organizations during the
preparation of this book. Space does not permit listing these entities
here. However, an attempt is made to acknowledge these many
contributions as each particular item—circuit, device, or equipment—
is covered. This approach also provides the beginner in amateur radio
with specific information and source(s) concerning amateur parts
and equipment.
Many thanks are due the author’s wife, Irma, who provided
invaluable assistance and encouragement during the preparation of
the manuscript. Finally, the publisher’s cooperation and patience for
extending the deadline, as well as superb technical expertise in pub-
lishing this book, is greatly appreciated.
xix
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
This page intentionally left blank.
Have you ever listened to an AM or FM radio receiver and wondered
how radio waves travel through space? Have you gazed at a televi-
sion set and asked how pictures generated on the other side of the
earth can be transmitted to your TV receiver? Have you operated a cit-
izens band radio and wanted to extend your range of communications
worldwide? If you answered yes to any of these questions, you may be
on the road to amateur radio, an exciting and rewarding hobby extend-
ing into almost every phase of electronics. Just pass the required Fed-
eral Communications Commission (FCC) exams given by authorized
amateur radio operators in your neighborhood and you’re ready to
become an amateur operator (or “ham”) yourself.
Who Can Become a Ham Radio Operator?
Anyone, regardless of age, is eligible to become a ham radio operator
in the United States. Persons from less than 10 years to over 80 years
of age have become hams.
Many disabled individuals have entered the ranks of amateur
radio. Operators can apply for special testing provisions if they have
physical disabilities. Learning materials are available on video or
audio tape or in books to assist in the learning processes. After becom-
ing an amateur radio operator, the ham has many radio equipment
Introduction to Amateur Radio
1
1
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
2 CHAPTER ONE
options. Many modern amateur radios (receivers, transmitters, etc.) pro-
vide voice outputs and can be controlled by computers using voice com-
mands. Organizations such as the Courage HANDIHAM System (see
Chap. 2) provide a wide variety of services to aid those with disabilities.
Aliens, except representatives of foreign governments, are encour-
aged to apply for a U.S. ham license if they plan to be in the country
for an extended period of time. We’ll tell you how to prepare and
apply for your ham license in Chap. 2.
New Avenues into Amateur Radio
The FCC No-Code Technician License will allow you to enter the ranks
of amateur radio and get on the air with a minimum of effort. Yes, that’s
right—you can skip the Morse code tests and pass a written test for the
new No-Code Tech class license. This license allows you to operate on
all amateur bands above 50 megahertz (MHz), including the popular
6-meter and 2-meter bands with exciting local repeater and packet
radio operation, 440 MHz for amateur television, satellite and long-
range “radio link” operation, and advanced microwave systems.
In case the megahertz and meter terms confuse you, just remember
that they refer to the bands of frequency for amateur operation. You prob-
ably already know that the AM broadcast band covers 540 to 1650 kilo-
hertz (kHz) and the FM broadcast band covers 88 to 108 MHz. However,
we’ll explain the meaning of these and other terms later. The important
thing is that you can talk to other hams, using single sideband (SSB), fre-
quency modulation (FM), or packet radio modes of operation. Then later,
if you want to get on some of the amateur radio high-frequency bands (i.e.,
below 50 MHz) for direct long-distance voice or Morse code contacts, you
can pass an easy five words per minute (WPM) Morse code test to qualify
for the Technician Class license. Finally, you can earn even more amateur
operating privileges by passing General and Extra Class license tests.
Remember, you can take any of these tests from qualified hams in your
area at a time convenient to you and the ham volunteer examiner.
About Amateur Radio
We live in a world of fantastic technological developments that affect
almost every phase of our daily lives. Space exploration, high-speed
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 3
jet aircraft, and advanced developments in medicine, digital comput-
ers, and worldwide electronic communications are but a few of these
achievements. Amateur radio offers a challenging entry into exploring
much of the technology involved in many of these fields. Amateur
radio operators have made many significant contributions to radio
communications and electronics technology. In fact, many scientists,
engineers, and even astronauts pursue amateur radio as a rewarding
hobby. Many of NASA’s space shuttle craft flights include Shuttle
Amateur Radio Experiment (SAREX) contacts with amateur radio
operators.
There are many fascinating aspects to amateur radio—talking to
fellow hams, participating in emergency communications during dis-
asters, studying electronics technology, or building ham gear and
antennas using state-of-the-art electronic components. Many hams use
amateur radio as a steppingstone to a rewarding career in electronics.
But wait—this marvelous technology is only about 100 years old.
Before we get into the details of amateur radio and how to pass the
FCC exam for an amateur radio license, let’s look into the fascinating
history of amateur radio.
A History of Amateur Radio
A history of amateur radio would not be complete without acknowl-
edging some of the early discoveries in the field of electricity and
magnetism. From the dawn of history, man has been fascinated by the
effects of electricity and magnetism produced by nature such as light-
ning, static electricity, and magnets.
Early pioneers
One of the first major scientific breakthroughs was made by Michael
Faraday, an English physicist and the son of a blacksmith, in the
early nineteenth century. Although he made many discoveries in
several scientific fields, Faraday’s major achievement was the dis-
covery of electromagnetic induction and the formulation of the laws
of induction. Today we know this as the process where electrons
move in a conductor when the conductor is moved through a mag-
netic field. This discovery led to the development of the electric gen-
erator and motor.
4 CHAPTER ONE
In 1873 James Clerk Maxwell, a Scottish physicist-astronomer,
mathematically proved the existence of electromagnetic (or radio)
waves traveling at the speed of light. Now the stage was set to prove
the existence of radio waves in the laboratory.
About 15 years after Maxwell’s investigation (and 5 years after his
death), Heinrich Hertz, a German physicist, demonstrated that radio
waves could be generated and transmitted over short distances of up to
about 60 feet (or about 20 meters). With his crude laboratory appara-
tus, Hertz was able to measure the wavelength of the waves he gener-
ated and show that these waves could be reflected, refracted, and
polarized just as light waves are. Working in the 150-MHz-and-above
radio spectrum, he designed and built spark-gap transmitters, res-
onator circuits for receiving radio waves, and directional antennas. As
you will see later, 1 MHz is the expression of radio frequency for 1 mil-
lion Hertz, or 1 million cycles per second. This frequency of 150 MHz
is just above the amateur 2-meter band at 144–148 MHz.
In the early 1890s Guglielmo Marconi, an Italian inventor, began to
experiment with radio waves using equipment similar to that devel-
oped by Hertz and other scientists of the era (Fig. 1.1). Marconi made
many improvements and inventions that resulted in extending the
range of radio transmissions. He conceived the concept of a vertical
radiating antenna, and the Marconi (or vertical) antenna is one of his
major accomplishments.
Marconi’s first crude equipment was capable of a range of about
one-half mile (about 800 meters). In 1896 he moved from Bologna,
Italy, to England, where he made substantial improvements that
increased the operating range of his equipment to about 4 miles (about
6.5 kilometers). By 1898, he succeeded in transmitting “wireless” sig-
nals across the English Channel. A major milestone was reached in
1901 when Marconi and his English associates transmitted radio
waves across the Atlantic Ocean from Poldu, England, to Halifax,
Newfoundland. Thus born, long-range radio communications would
have an impact upon the lives of all people regardless of nationality or
position in life.
The first major use of the new wireless telegraph sets was to pro-
vide for maritime communications. By 1905, spark-gap transmitters
and coherer detector receivers were installed on many of the merchant
ships and naval vessels on the high seas. For the first time, instant
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 5
communications between remote ships and land-based communica-
tions centers were feasible. All of this was accomplished without the
use of vacuum tubes or transistors—they would be invented later
to provide for amplification of the weak radio signals intercepted by
the antennas.
Beginning of amateur radio
The introduction of commercial wireless telegraph equipment after the
turn of the century aroused the imagination and interest of people
around the world. Some experimenters were content to build simple
crystal detector receivers and monitor the raspy code signals transmit-
ted from fixed or rotary spark transmitters at marine or government
communications stations. Other experimenters, particularly the rest-
less and aggressive youngsters, assembled spark-gap transmitters, as
well as crystal detector receivers, and began sending “dots and dashes”
between home separated by a few miles (Fig. 1.2). The range of these
early “amateur” stations was increased by continual improvements in
equipment and higher power output. Amateur wireless organizations
F I G U R E 1 . 1
Guglielmo Marconi with one of his early wireless sets. This photograph, taken in 1902,
illustrates the induction spark coil transmitter (right), the “grasshopper” handkey
(center), and the receiving apparatus (left).
6 CHAPTER ONE
F I G U R E 1 . 2
Early amateur radio wireless equipment. (a) Early crystal receiver using a 2-side
antenna tuning inductor, “Cat Whisper” detector, phone blocking capacitor, and head-
phones. (b) 1914 spark-gap transmitter, employing a vibrator-type spark coil, Dubilier
fixed capacitor, Bunnel telegraph key (in front), Murdock straight spark gap, and home-
made helix coil. These are representative of amateur radios used around 1914. Under
favorable conditions, the transmitter could be heard for distances up to about 30 miles.
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 7
were formed across the country, beginning with the Junior Wireless
Club of New York in January 1909. Amateur radio had come of age!
During radio’s infancy, no government rules or regulations were in
effect to govern the use of wireless operations. Wavelengths, or operat-
ing frequencies, in the vicinity of 300 to 1000 meters were selected by
the users on the basis of available equipment. The inevitable conflict
between commercial and amateur users abruptly surfaced when inter-
ference from amateur transmissions threatened the reliability of com-
mercial radio communications. The U.S. Navy, which was quickly
developing radio communications facilities, addressed some of the
administrative problems and began issuing “certificates of skill in
radio communications” in lieu of licenses. By late 1910, the Navy had
issued some 500 of these certificates, many to amateur operators.
By this time, the number of individuals interested in or participat-
ing in amateur radio had grown to an estimated 10,000 or more. Ama-
teur transmitters with power outputs of several kilowatts could be
heard up to 400 miles (about 650 kilometers) away. However, most
amateurs could not afford such luxury and had to be content with
ranges of about 5 miles (8 kilometers), with occasional contacts up to
100 miles (160 kilometers). Many wireless equipment stores had
appeared by this time, selling crystal detectors, spark-gaps, induction
coils, and tuners—the basic ingredients of wireless stations.
First licenses for amateur radio operators
Beginning in 1902, the U.S. Congress recognized the need for regulat-
ing the use of wireless operation. However, it was not until 1910 that
the first bill (the Act of June 24, 1910) was passed. This bill required
the mandatory use of wireless equipment on certain ocean steamers
and did not apply to amateur radio. Some bills were introduced in the
Congress that would have given all authority for radio communica-
tions to the government. If passed, any of these bills would have abol-
ished amateur radio. Fortunately, these bills were defeated and
amateur experimentation increased at a rapid rate.
Finally in 1912, Congress passed an all-encompassing bill cover-
ing all phases of radio communications in the United States. Ama-
teur operation was restricted to wavelengths below 200 meters and
maximum power levels of 1 kilowatt. The lawmakers believed that
8 CHAPTER ONE
wavelengths below 200 meters were useless and that this restriction
would eventually eliminate the troublesome amateur radio society.
This action by the government proved to be a gold mine for the
amateur operators. Refinements in electronics technology and the
introduction of the new deForest vacuum tube allowed the amateurs
to build short-wave equipment capable of spanning distances of hun-
dreds of miles with low power. Radio clubs were established in all
parts of the country. Amateurs began to send personal messages for
other individuals to distant cities and remote locations. Emergency
communications during periods of disasters were now emerging as a
major contribution by the amateurs.
By 1914, the American Radio Relay League (ARRL) was formed to
promote the concept of national relaying of amateur traffic across the
country. Through the dynamic leadership of Hiram Percy Maxim, the
ARRL grew to become the largest amateur radio organization in the
United States. By late 1914, efficient relay networks were organized
over most of the eastern United States and many stations were dedi-
cated to handling traffic as a public service. By 1915, the ARRL intro-
duced QST, a radio amateur journal devoted solely to the pursuits of
amateur radio. Today, the ARRL membership includes over 120,000 in
North America and some 12,000 foreign and unlicensed associate
members. You’ll want to consider joining the ARRL to support ama-
teur radio and to receive the monthly QST. This magazine features
construction articles, technical information, news concerning ama-
teurs and amateur meetings, etc. For more information, you can con-
tact the American Radio Relay League at ARRL, 225 Main Street,
Newington, CT 06111-1494; telephone: (860) 594-0200; or on the
World Wide Web at: http://www.arrl.org/.
The death knell for amateur radio
All amateur radio operations were suspended when the United States
entered World War I in 1917. The government order suspending all
forms of amateur radio required that the aerial wires be lowered to the
ground and all radio apparatus for transmitting and receiving be dis-
connected from the antennas and rendered inoperative.
The U.S. military forces were faced, at the beginning of the war,
with virtually no radio operators, instructors, or technical special-
ists. The ARRL assisted the government in locating volunteers
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 9
among the amateur ranks to meet immediate needs in the military.
In addition, some of the equipment from the more elaborate amateur
stations was released to the government for use by the military. Alto-
gether, an estimated 3500 to 4000 amateur radio operators served in
the U.S. Armed Forces, contributing their knowledge and expertise
in radio communications to the war effort. When the armistice end-
ing World War I was signed in November 1918, the amateurs were
impatient to resume operation. However, the U.S. Congress was con-
sidering legislation that would eliminate all forms of amateur radio
activity. This legislation would have granted control of all forms of
radio communications to the Navy Department. Fortunately, ama-
teur operators, led by ARRL President Maxim, descended upon Con-
gress and mounted sufficient opposition to defeat the proposed bill.
Control and regulation of radio communications was left to the
Commerce Department. The wartime ban on amateur radio activity
was finally lifted on November 1, 1919.
After 2 12 years of silence, the amateurs were finally permitted to
resume operation. There was a rush to obtain licenses and get back on
the air. Some of the amateurs dusted off their old spark-gap transmit-
ters and crystal-detector receivers for immediate operation. Others
began to adapt to the new vacuum tubes for both transmitter and
receiver use. Radio parts houses sprang up in all major urban areas and
mail-order firms began to advertise regularly in the few available radio
publications, such as QST.
The golden age of amateur radio
Beginning in the late 1920s, amateur radio experienced phenomenal
growth in the numbers of operators and in radio communications tech-
nology. This growth continued until the United States entered World
War II in 1941 and the amateurs were forced to cease operation for the
duration of the war. During this period, the number of amateurs had
increased from almost 17,000 in 1929 to over 54,000 in 1941.
The typical ham of the 1930s was a young high-school or trade-
school graduate with little or no extra money with which to buy radio
equipment. Fortunately, the coming of age of the commercial radio
broadcasting field brought a bonanza of radio parts that could be
adapted to amateur radio uses. Used AM broadcast receiving tubes
were readily available at little cost for the amateur-built receivers and
10 CHAPTER ONE
transmitters. The typical amateur transmitter consisted of a single-tube
oscillator circuit. The power output of this simple rig varied from about
1 to 2 watts, depending on the power supply and the type of tube. A
two-tube receiver with a regenerative detector and audio amplifier was
used by most amateurs in the early 1930s. Dry-cell batteries or a junk-
box “battery-eliminator” power supply normally served to power the
transmitter and receiver. Today, you can build and use simple short-
wave receivers and QRP (low-power) transmitters for contacts with
other hams over distances of thousands of miles (Fig. 1.3). These easy-
to-build radios are described in Chaps. 8 and 9.
This period of amateur radio saw many important technological
advances. In fact, most of the techniques and tools used by the modern
amateur were developed and tested during this time period. These
developments included the superheterodyne receiver, single-sideband
F I G U R E 1 . 3
The MFJ enterprised low-power CW “QRP” 20-meter amateur radio station. (a) The MFJ-0120 20-meter trans-
ceiver, MFJ-971 antenna tuner and MFJ-4114 power pack. (b) The MFJ-1772-20 meter folded dipole antenna
for fixed or portable operation. This compact ham station is capable of 4 watts output for virtually worldwide
contacts. Other similar MFJ transceivers and antennas are available for 40-, 30-, and 17-, and 15-meter oper-
ations. [MFJ Enterprises, Inc., Box 494, Mississippi State, MS 39762, Telephone (601) 323-5869]
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 11
modulation, frequency modulation, high-gain beam antennas, and vhf
communications techniques. Amateur experimentation ranged from
improving simple transmitters and receivers to pioneering develop-
ments in radio astronomy.
The old raspy sounds of the spark-gap transmitters had been
replaced by the clear, crisp signals of continuous-wave (cw) transmit-
ters and voice-modulated rigs. Amateur radio had become a perma-
nent part of the American way of life.
Amateur Radio—A Scientific Hobby
Amateur radio today is a highly specialized hobby involving almost all
phases of electronics. There are about 500,000 ham radio operators in
the United States. Worldwide, there are some 700,000 amateurs, and
almost all countries authorize some form of amateur radio. Hams come
from all walks of life: for example, students, salesmen, plumbers, doc-
tors, lawyers, engineers, seamen, and the handicapped.
The FCC, which administers and regulates all radio activity in the
United States, defines the Amateur Radio Service as one of self-train-
ing, intercommunication, and technical investigation carried on by
amateur radio operators.
The great appeal of amateur radio is centered on the incredible abil-
ity to communicate person-to-person worldwide and a fascination
with the marvels of electronics. Hams constantly keep abreast of tech-
nical advances in electronics, and in some cases it is the ham who pio-
neers the development of some phase of radio or electronics.
Amateur radio activity today ranges from high-frequency (80 to
100 meters) communications [involving cw, single-sideband voice,
data (computer-to-computer and teletypewriter), and slow-scan tele-
vision] to amateur communications satellites operating on frequen-
cies from 28 MHz to 435 MHz and microwave frequencies (Figs. 1.4
and 1.5). Another space-age development is that of moon-bounce
communications using the moon as a passive reflector for communi-
cations signals in the 144-MHz to 2450-MHz frequency bands. A
recent development in the electronics field—digital microelectron-
ics—is being adapted to amateur radio with increasing applications.
The integrated-circuit (IC) chips containing logic gates, flip-flops,
and even a complete “computer-on-a-chip” or digital processor, are
12 CHAPTER ONE
available to hams at bargain-basement
prices. A typical IC chip—containing up
to a hundred or more transistors, diodes,
and resistors and forming many digital
circuits—will cost the ham a mere $0.50
to several dollars each. Hams have
adapted these chips to digital circuits
ranging from electronic keyers to Morse
code translators. Many ham “shacks”
include a personal computer (PC) for
maintaining station log records, propaga-
tion analysis, packet radio, locations of
amateur satellites, and even automatic
tracking of the station antennas for satel-
lite communications. By the way, don’t
be alarmed by the subjects mentioned
above—we’ll cover all of them in this
book.
Another exciting aspect of microelec-
tronic circuits is the operational amplifier
(op-amp) and related types of “analog” IC
chips. The availability of the op-amp has
allowed the amateur to design and build
active filters for cw (Morse code) applica-
tions with bandwidths of less than 100 Hz.
Other linear-circuit ICs containing many
transistors are used as basic building
blocks for receivers, modulators, and low-
power transmitters. We will examine some
of these devices in subsequent chapters and show you how you can
build a complete ham station with a minimum of cost and effort.
Amateur Radio Public Service
One of the most important aspects of amateur radio is that of public
service. The FCC states that one justification for the Amateur Radio
Service is the recognition and enhancement of the value of the ama-
teur service to the public as a voluntary noncommercial communi-
The OSCAR 10 radio communications satellite. One of
a series of amateur satellites, OSCAR 10 was launched
in June 1983. Amateurs on a worldwide basis are able
to extend their communications using these satellites.
Additional information can be obtained from AMSAT-
NA, 850 Sligo Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20910-4703;
telephone: (301) 589-6062.
F I G U R E 1 . 4
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 13
cations service, particularly with respect to providing emergency
communications.
One of the first disasters for which amateurs provided emergency
communications was the heavy sleet storm that hit western and north-
ern New York State in December 1929. The storm tore down telephone
and power lines and isolated many cities in the area. Hams assisted
telephone and power companies and the railroads in establishing
emergency communications.
Since that time, hams have been instrumental in establishing emer-
gency communications during natural disasters such as floods, earth-
quakes, fires, storms, explosions, train wrecks, and plane crashes.
Although space does not permit a complete summary of these activities,
some of the major disasters during which hams provided emergency
communications were Hurricane Carla in Texas (September 1961), Hur-
ricane Hugo in the Caribbean and Puerto Rico (September 1989), and
the Loma Prieta earthquake (October 1989).
In addition to major disasters, hams have continually been in the
forefront in providing communications in the event of personal
F I G U R E 1 . 5
The Kenwood TS-50S/60S hf transceiver with 6-meter capability. The TS-50S/60 is one
of the smallest and hottest hf mobile radios available today. Featuring most of the
capabilities of the “big brother” hf radios, this compact mobile rig provides 100 watts
power output, 100 memory channels, dual VFOs, split operation and a power menu sys-
tem. [Kenwood Communications Corporation, Amateur Radio Products, P.O. Box 22745, 2201
E. Dominguez St., Long Beach, CA 90801-5745; telephone: (310) 639-5300; Internet address:
http://www.kenwood.net/.]
14 CHAPTER ONE
emergencies such as a lost child, an automobile accident, or partici-
pation in an eye transplant bank.
Hams are organized in almost all communities to provide commu-
nications service to the public. Each year, hams participate in Field Day
exercises during which they set up simulated emergency field commu-
nications centers powered by portable gasoline or diesel generators
(Fig. 1.6). In addition to Field Day, hams across the country practice
sending emergency traffic on Simulated Emergency Traffic (SET) Day.
The radio amateur’s contribution to the country during war has
been outstanding. In World War I, some 4000 hams served in the
Armed Forces. Again in World War II, more than 24,000 hams served
in the Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps, con-
tributing their skills and talent to the war effort. Countless numbers of
other hams were engaged in electronics research and manufacturing
activities supporting the war effort. During the Korean and Vietnam
F I G U R E 1 . 6
Typical amateur Field Day activity. Hams across the country participate in Field Day,
held each year during the summer. The purpose is to develop and test emergency com-
munications techniques for disasters such as floods, storms, or power blackouts.
INTRODUCTION TO AMATEUR RADIO 15
conflicts, amateurs relayed many messages from service personnel
overseas to their families and friends in the States. These traffic nets
handled personal messages via relay stations located mostly on the
West Coast. In many cases, the service personnel were able to talk
directly to their loved ones in the United States using telephone
patches established by the amateurs.
Another important area of public service by the amateur is in pro-
viding communications for expeditions to remote areas such as the
Arctic and Antarctic. In 1923, Con Mix, 1TS (early call signs did not
have a W, K, A, or N prefix) accompanied MacMillan to the Arctic
aboard the schooner Bowdoin. Hams in Canada and the United States
provided home contacts for the explorers. Since that time, amateurs
have assisted some 200 expeditions. At present, amateurs provide
much of the personal communications for the personnel at the Antarc-
tic research stations.
The Path into Amateur Radio—The Technician
Class License
Prior to April 15, 2000, the beginner in amateur radio could select the
Novice Class, Technician (Tech-Plus) Class, or the No-Code Techni-
cian Class License. Today, the entry-level license is the Technician
Class, which requires only a 35-question written examination. The
operating privileges for the Technician cover all amateur bands above
50 MHz. This includes the 6-meter band (50–54 MHz), the 2-meter
band (144–148 MHz), and the 70-cm band (420–450 MHz). Additional
hf operating frequencies are available when the Technician Class ama-
teur operator passes the 5-WPM Morse code test. Tables 1.1 and 1.2
present the key information on these Technician operating bands.
With this preliminary background, let’s get started on the basics of
amateur radio. We want you to learn the theory of ham radio as well as
a good proficiency in Morse code as soon as possible. In this way, you
can schedule and pass the Technician examination in a minimum of
time. Good luck and good contacts!
TABLE 1.1 Technician Operating Bands, Privileges, and Normal Communications Capability
Operating Band Frequencies and Operating Privileges Communications Capability
6 meters 50–54 MHz: Morse code (cw), single sideband This band features almost all modes of propagation as it
voice (SSB), frequency modulation voice (SSB), is situated between the hf and vhf frequency bands. Dur-
radio printer (RTTY), FM repeaters, radio control ing times of high sunspot activity, daytime contacts of
(RC), experimental modes and signal beacons up to 3200 km (2000 miles) are possible via skywave
propagation. Routine contacts of up to 500 km (300
miles) are possible with high-power transmitters and
high-gain antennas. Sporadic E-layer propagation is a
favorite of 6-meter hams, providing short band openings
at distances of up to about 3000 km (1200 miles).
2 meters 144–148 MHz: Most of the above privileges plus: Most hams use the 2-meter band for local repeater oper-
amateur satellite operation, earth-moon-earth ation. Most metropolitan areas will have literally dozens
(EME or “moon bounce”), packet (digital) radio of 2-meter repeaters. The higher frequencies permit
smaller antennas and inexpensive repeater equipment.
The 2-meter mobile for automobiles (and even airplanes
and boats) and hand-held (HT, or walkie-talkies) permit
new hams to get on the air with a minimum of equip-
ment and small, inexpensive antennas. Some hams do
build elaborate 2-meter stations that can provide long-
range contacts of up to about 2000 km (1200 miles) via
sporadic E-layer propagation and tropospheric ducting.
Finally, the “line of sight” propagation mode of 2-meter
frequency signals is used extensively in amateur ratio
satellite and earth-moon-earth (EME) operations.
16
135 centimeters 222–225 MHz: Same privileges as 2-meter Propagation modes via the 135-centimeter band are simi
band above lar to those via the above 2-meter band.
70 centimeters 420–450 MHz: Most of the above privileges plus: As with 2 meters, the 70-centimeter band is very popular
amateur television (ATV) for amateur radio repeater, satellite, and EME operation.
The small size of 70-centimeter radios and antennas per-
mits installation of 70-centimeter radios almost any-
where. More elaborate 70-centimeter stations can also
permit long-range contacts between “earth-bound” hams
over distance of up to about 2000 km (1200 miles). Prop-
agation in these cases includes ionospheric modes and
meteor scatter.
35 centimeters 902–928 MHz: Most of above privileges plus: The 35-centimeter and 23-centimeter bands represent
digital communications and wideband ATV the amateur’s entry into the microwave frequencies. Here,
the assembly and construction of ham microwave equip-
ment are much different than those in the lower frequency
bands. A short length of wire—say 2.5 to 7 cm (1 to 3
inches)—may act as an inductor or a filter, or even as an
antenna! Small and compact is the name of the game.
Also, propagation of microwave signals is very similar to
that of optical or light signals. Much amateur operation in
these bands is accomplished in the “line of sight” mode.
However, more elaborate amateur stations can accomplish
long-range contacts from 50 to 500 miles or more.
Amateur bands above the 902- to 928-MHz band extend up to 300 GHz. Much of this part of the radio frequency spectrum is still
undeveloped, with little equipment available for amateur use. Considerable research and development, some by amateur radio spe-
cialists, is being accomplished to develop new equipment and investigate propagation techniques in these higher frequency bands.
17
18 CHAPTER ONE
TABLE 1.2 Technician HF Operating Bands, Privileges and Normal Communications
Capability.
Operating Band Frequencies and Operating Privileges Communications Capability
80 meters 3.675–3.725 MHz: Morse code (cw) Day: Reliable communications up to 250
km (150 miles) to about 400 km (250
miles). Range will increase during early
morning and evening hours. Night: Reli-
able communications up to about 800
km (500 miles) to about 2400 km (1500
miles). Possible contacts to 4000 km
(2500 miles) and beyond.
40 meters 7.100–7.150 MHz: Morse code (cw) Day: Reliable communications to about
1100 km (700 miles) and beyond. Range
will decrease at midday and early after-
noon hours. Night: Reliable communica-
tions up to about 16,000 km (10,000
miles).
15 meters 21.100–21.150 MHz: Morse code (cw) Day: Communication distances vary with
sunspot activity. During maximum
sunspot activity, worldwide communica-
tion is possible. During minimum
sunspot activity, limited daytime con-
tacts during “band openings” are possi-
ble. Night: Virtually no nighttime
contacts are possible during minimal
sunspot activity, except for ground-wave
communications up to about 30 km (20
miles).
10 meters 28.100—28.300 MHz: Morse code (cw), Similar to 15 meters, above.
RTTY, and data; 28.300–28.500 MHz:
SSB voice and cw
NOTE : Technician Class Operator must have passed the 5 WPM Morse code test to qualify for these privileges.
The Entrance to the World of Amateur Radio Is Easy
The FCC has established the Technician license for the beginner in
amateur radio. Furthermore, the FCC authorizes local volunteer exam-
iners to administer the examinations for the Technician Class license
and higher class licenses such as the General Class and Extra Class
licenses. As stated in Chap. 1, the Technician Class license provides
for all amateur radio operating privileges above 50 MHz. To qualify for
selected operating privileges in the amateur HF bands, you must pass
a 5 words per minute (WPM) Morse code test.
The Technician Class license examination has 35 questions, and
passing requires a minimum of 75 percent (or a total of 27) correct
answers. This written examination covers radio theory, FCC rules and
regulations, and operating procedures—all the knowledge you will
need to set up and operate your ham station. As a general rule, you can
master the requirements for the Technician Class license with two or
three months of dedicated study. Considerable less time (six to eight
weeks) will be sufficient if you are fortunate to enroll in local “Code and
Theory” classes handled by amateur radio clubs or civic organizations.
To prepare for the Technician examination, the beginner in amateur
radio can obtain any necessary help from a variety of sources. One of the
more successful approaches is to enroll in a Technician class sponsored
by a local ham club or other organizations, such as the YMCA or a
church group. These courses give you the advantage of studying with
How to Prepare for the FCC
Technician Class Examination
2
19
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
20 CHAPTER TWO
your peers in an educational environment. Most of these courses will
run for about 7 to 10 weeks with one or two class periods per week. Each
period may last for about 2 to 4 hours. The final class period is usually
a test session whereby the volunteer examiner (VE) team is scheduled to
hold an open test session. Classes sponsored by the local ham club are
usually very inexpensive, sometimes only the cost of the course text and
a year’s club membership dues. If no local ham course is available, the
neighborhood ham (or “Elmer” as they are affectionately called) will be
pleased to help you prepare for your Technician exam.
Self-study is another approach for learning the material required for
the Technician examination. This book covers all of the material con-
tained in the Technician examination—namely, FCC rules and regula-
tions, electronics theory, ham receivers and transmitters, antennas and
propagation, and radio communications practices and operating proce-
dures. Furthermore, this book contains the actual FCC question pool
from which the 35 Technician examination questions are taken. Yes,
you actually have access to the Technician question pool, and answers
to each question are available at the end of this book (see Appendix A).
Additional study guides for amateur radio examinations are avail-
able from various sources. For example, the amateur radio organiza-
tions listed below offer study texts, videotapes, and computer software
packages designed to make learning the required material more effi-
cient (Fig. 2.1).
QST. A monthly magazine published as the official journal of the
American Radio Relay League, 225 Main Street, Newington, CT
06111-1494. For more information call (800) 326-3942, or e-mail:
newham@arrl.org. Web page: http://www.arrl.org
73 Amateur Radio Today. A monthly magazine published by 73 Mag-
azine, 70 N202, Peterborough, NH 03458-1107. For more informa-
tion call (603) 924-0058. Web page: www.waynegreen.com
The W5YI Group, Inc. Offers ham test prep tapes, books, software, and
videos. Contact the W5YI Group at P.O. Box 565101, Dallas, TX
75356, or call toll-free 1-800-669-9594. Web page: www.w5yI.org
The HANDIHAM World. Published three times annually by the Courage
HANDIHAM System, an organization devoted since 1967 to amateur
radio for persons with physical disabilities and sensory impairments.
3915 Golden Valley Road, Golden Valley, MN 55422. Telephone:
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 21
(763) 520-0511 (voice), (763) 520-0577
(fax), or e-mail: handiham@mtn.org.
Additional information may be
obtained from the HANDIHAM Web
site: http://www.handiham.org
When you are ready to take the Techni-
cian (or higher) Class license examination,
a local VE team consisting primarily of
EXTRA Class hams, will be available to
schedule the examination. Most VE teams
regularly schedule VE examinations on a
monthly or semimonthly basis. For further
information on the VE test teams, contact
the local amateur radio club or ARRL at the
above address. Practically everyone in
the United States, regardless of age, is eli-
gible to take the FCC amateur radio exami-
nations. This includes aliens who have a
valid U.S. address and are not representa-
tives of a foreign government.
The Federal Communications
Commission
The FCC, established by the Communica-
tions Act of 1934, regulates and licenses all
radio transmitters in the United States and aboard all U.S.-registered
ships and aircraft. Unlike many other countries, the U.S. does not
license the possession of radio receivers. The “bible” of radio laws that
governs all FCC activity contains some 40 parts. The Amateur Radio
Service is covered in Part 97, Rules and Regulations. A copy of Part 97
can be obtained from the ARRL, local ham radio and book stores, or the
FCC. Also, Part 97 can be downloaded from the Government Printing
Office at www.gpo.gov.
The structure of the FCC includes a headquarters located in Wash-
ington, DC, a license and call-sign processing facility in Gettysburg,
Pennsylvania, some 16 radio districts or field offices, and some 13 FCC
monitoring stations. For more information concerning any FCC radio
The W5YI Computer Aided Instruction Software Pack-
age for all Amateur Radio Morse code and written
elements, including Technician and up to Extra Class.
Probably the fastest way to learn Morse code, and
study all of the questions that appear on the various
ham radio written tests, is with a personal computer.
This Ham Operator software package contains mater-
ial that covers everything, including teaching code
and all questions in every question pool.
F I G U R E 2 . 1
22 CHAPTER TWO
district or monitoring station, contact the Public Service Division,
Federal Communications Commission, 445 12th Street SW, Washing-
ton, DC 20554 [telephone: (202) 418-0200, fax: (202) 418-2555].
The FCC Volunteer Examiner Program
The FCC has “deregulated” the amateur radio service in terms of ama-
teur radio license examinations. In effect, the responsibility for admin-
istering all examinations for amateur radio licenses has been
transferred to the amateur radio community. The chances are good that
any local ham club will be affiliated with the ARRL and will be autho-
rized by the ARRL to administer all amateur radio license examina-
tions, including the Technician Class exam.
Examinations for the Technician and higher-class (General and
Extra) amateur radio licenses are administered by amateur radio VE
teams. Each VE team consist of a minimum of three qualified volunteer
examiners, certified by a volunteer examiner coordinator (VEC) autho-
rized by the FCC. The ARRL and the W5YI Group are representative of
the VECs. Each VEC must maintain a question pool (available to the
public), prepare and administer license examinations, make public
announcements for examination schedules, and qualify VE personnel.
The VEC entity must be organized, at least partially, for the purpose
of furthering amateur radio, and agree not to accept any compensation
from any source for its services. However, in order to defray the
expense of preparing and administering tests, the VEC is authorized to
charge a maximum fee (on the order of $6) for each applicant.
FCC Amateur Radio Operating Classes
There are currently five classes of amateur radio licenses, which pro-
vide increasing privileges at each step forward. However, the recent
FCC changes to the amateur license structure call for the eventual
elimination of the Novice and Advanced Class Licenses. Current
licensed Novice and Advanced amateur operators may continue to
operate on the authorized amateur frequency bands or elect to upgrade
to higher-class licenses. No new FCC examinations for the Novice and
Advanced class licenses will be permitted. The Technician Class
license is now the entry level into amateur radio. As a Technician
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 23
Class amateur operator, you will enjoy all amateur privileges above 50
MHz. No Morse code test is required for the Technician Class license.
However, you must pass a 35-question written examination (Element 2)
to receive this license. Technician Class privileges can be expanded to
selected portions of the HF bands by passing the Element 1, a 5-WPM
Morse code test.
The second step in amateur radio is the General Class license. This
license requires that you pass a second 35-question written exam (Ele-
ment 3) and have credit for the 5-WPM Morse code test (Element 1). In
return, you will receive operating privileges for all or portions of all ama-
teur bands. This includes the exciting hf bands between 3 and 30 MHz.
The top amateur license, the Amateur Extra Class, requires passing
a 50-question written exam (Element 4) on advanced topics. This “top
prize” in amateur radio gives you all the operating privileges in all
amateur bands. Keep this goal in mind as you progress through the
ranks of amateur radio.
A summary of the amateur radio license requirements and privi-
leges is given in Table 2.1. Note that the Technician Class license per-
mits the beginner to obtain valuable experience in virtually all types of
amateur radio communications.
The Amateur Radio Frequency Spectrum
The amateur radio frequency begins just above the AM broadcast band
(540–1650 kHz) at 1800 kHz and contains small “chunks” of band-
width or bands of frequencies up to 300 GHz and beyond. At this time,
the amateur portion of the radio frequency spectrum is probably the
largest of any single user organization. However, as electronic tech-
niques and development of communications equipment for the higher
frequency bands advance, commercial and government organizations
will find ways to use these bands.
One of the strengths of amateur radio that attracts so many people
is the abundance and diverse nature of the frequency spectrum allo-
cated to amateur radio operators. Amateurs can build and/or experi-
ment with a wide variety of antennas, radio receivers, radio
transmitters, computers, and other communications systems that oper-
ate from the 1800–2000 kHz band to the microwave frequency bands
(tens of thousands of megahertz near the optical frequencies of light).
24 CHAPTER TWO
Each amateur radio band exhibits a unique set of characteristics,
requiring special techniques for designing and building antennas,
transmission lines, transmitters, and receivers. Some amateur radio
bands permit reliable communications on a worldwide basis, while
others are limited primarily to “line-of-sight” propagation. Some
amateurs specialize in the HF bands (3–30 MHz) for long-range DX
contacts involving single sideband (SSB) voice, Morse code (CW)
communications, or amateur slow-scan television. Some of these
amateurs use low-power “QRP rigs” of only a few watts to work with
other amateurs over long distances. Many of these QRP rigs are eas-
ily built and tested. Other amateurs experiment with digital data
transmissions involving computer-to-computer operation and slow-
scan television systems in the VHF and UHF frequency bands. You
will probably want to investigate many of these exciting aspects of
ham radio.
Figure 2.2 shows the total amateur radio frequency spectrum,
including the Technician Class license operating privileges. Many of
the amateur bands are assigned on approximate octave intervals
throughout the spectrum. For example, the 40-meter band is approxi-
TABLE 2.1 FCC Amateur Radio Licenses, Examination Requirements, and Operating
Privileges
Operator license Morse code Written Operating
class examination examination privileges
Technician (entry level) None Element 2 All amateur privileges above 50
(35 questions) MHz. This includes specific fre-
quency bands up to 300 GHz and
beyond
Technician with Element 1 Element 2 All privileges above 50 MHz and
Morse code 5-WPM test (35 questions) privileges on portions of selected
amateur HF bands below 30 MHz.
General Element 1 Element 3 All privileges above 50 MHz and
5-WPM test (35 questions) privileges on portions of all ama-
teur HF bands below 30 MHz.
Amateur Extra Note 1 Element 4 All privileges on all amateur bands.
(50 questions)
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 25
mately twice the frequency of the 80-meter band. In many instances,
this octave relationship aids in the design and construction of multi-
band radio transmitters, receivers, and even antennas. Additional
information concerning the methods of modulation and propagation
characteristics is discussed in Chap. 3. For a more detailed and up-to-
date listing of amateur frequencies and operating privileges, refer to
the current edition of the ARRL Handbook for the Radio Amateur.
FCC Rules and Regulations
Part 97: Amateur Radio Service
Basic law comprising rules and regulations essential to the operation
of amateur radio stations is contained in the Rules and Regulations of
the FCC, Part 97: Amateur Radio Service. As stated earlier, a copy of
Part 97 may be obtained from the U.S. Printing Office or directly from
the FCC. You are encouraged to obtain a copy of this document.
We will review Part 97 in terms of the Technician Class license
examination and subsequent Technician station operation, and pro-
vide selected portions of Part 97. You should become completely
familiar with these rules and regulations prior to taking the written
examination. Virtually all the FCC rules presented here relate to ques-
tions that will appear on the Element 2 exam.
BASIS AND PURPOSE.
This section expresses the justification for the existence of the Ama-
teur Radio Service. You may have wondered why the Amateur Radio
Service controls so much of the valuable radio frequency spectrum.
This justification is based on the following five functions of amateur
radio.
97.1 Basis and purpose. The rules and regulations in this part are
designed to provide an amateur radio service having a fundamental
purpose as expressed in the following principles:
(a) Recognition and enhancement of the value of the amateur radio
service to the public as a voluntary noncommercial service partic-
ularly with respect to providing emergency communications.
26 CHAPTER TWO
Amateur radio spectrum
HF band privileges
1800 2000
All modes
All modes
All modes
Gen
Adv
Ext
160 = Meter band (No novice-tech privileges)
Gen
Adv
Ext
All modes
All modes
All modes
CW
CW
3675 3725
3525 3750 3850 4000 Tech-P
3500
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
3775
75–80 = Meter band
7000
7025
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW
CW
7100 7150
7225 7300
All modes
All modes
All modes
40 = Meter band
Nov
Nov
Gen
Adv
Ext
Tech-P
F I G U R E 2 . 2 A
Amateur radio frequency spectrum and operating privileges.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 27
10,100 10,150
CW, 200 Watts only
CW, 200 Watts only
CW, 200 Watts only
Gen
Adv
Ext
30 = Meter band (No novice-tech privileges)
14,025
14,000
14,150 14,225 14,350
14,175CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
All modes
All modes
All modes
Gen
Adv
Ext
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
All modes
All modes
All modes
Gen
Adv
Ext
18,068 18,16818,110
20 = Meter band (No novice-tech privileges)
17 = Meter band (No novice-tech privileges)
21,100 21,200
21,025
21,000
21,225
21,300
CW
CW
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
All modes
All modes
All modes
Gen
Adv
Ext
Nov
Tech-P
15 = Meter band
F I G U R E 2 . 2 B
Amateur radio frequency spectrum and operating privileges.
24,890 24,930 24,990
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
All modes
All modes
All modes
12 = Meter band (No novice-tech privileges)
28,000
28,100 28,300 28,500
29,700
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
CW, Data
All modes
All modes
All modes
CW, SSB voice
CW, SSB voice
Gen
Adv
Ext
Gen
Adv
Ext
Nov
Tech-P
10 = Meter band
Remaining amateur radio bands
(Technicians and higher classes have
full privileges on all these bands.)
Very High Frequencies (VHF):
50 – 54 MHz
144 – 148 MHz
222 – 225 MHz
(Novice: 222.1 – 223.91 MHz)
Super High Frequencies (SHF):
3300 – 3500 MHz
5650 – 5925 MHz
10,000 – 10,500 MHz
24,000 – 24,250 MHz
Ultra High Frequencies (UHF):
420 – 450 MHz
902 – 928 MHz
1240 – 1300 MHz
(Novice: 1270 – 1295 MHz)
2300 – 2310 MHz
2390 – 2450 MHz
2300 – 2450 MHz
Extremely High Frequencies (EHF):
47,000 – 47,200 MHz
75,500 – 81,000 MHz
119,980 – 120,020 MHz
142,000 – 149,000 MHz
241,000 – 250,000 MHz
All frequencies above 300,00 MHz
NOTES: 1. Operator class designators:
Nov – Novice class Gen – General class
Tech-P – Technician plus codes Adv – Advanced class
Tech-NC – Technician no-code Ext – Extra class
2. Frequency is given in kilohertz unless specified.
2. Data modes may include radio printer via packet, ASCII
coding, AMTOR, SSTV (slow scan television) and other
advanced forms of data communications.
3. All modes may include CW (Morse code), voice (AM, SSB,
and/or FM, as specified) as well as the above data modes.
F I G U R E 2 . 2 C
Amateur radio frequency spectrum and operating privileges.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 29
(b) Continuation and extension of the amateur’s proven ability to con-
tribute to the advancement of the radio art.
(c) Encouragement and improvement of the amateur radio service
through rules which provide for advancing skills in both the com-
munication and technical phases of the art.
(d) Expansion of the existing reservoir within the amateur radio ser-
vice of trained operators, technicians, and electronics experts.
(e) Continuation and extension of the amateur’s unique ability to
enhance international good will.
DEFINITIONS
The definitions of terms essential to the operation of amateur radio sta-
tions are contained in Part 97.3. Almost all Technician examinations
will include one or more of these definitions.
97.3 Definitions.
(a) The definitions of terms used in Part 97 are:
(1) Amateur operator. A person holding a written authorization
to be the control operator of an amateur station.
(2) Amateur radio service. The amateur service, the amateur-
satellite service and the radio amateur civil emergency ser-
vice (RACES).
(3) Amateur-satellite service. A radiocommunications service
using stations on Earth satellites for the same purpose as
those of the amateur service.
(4) Amateur service. A radiocommunications service for the
purpose of self training, intercommunication and technical
investigations carried out by amateurs, that is, duly autho-
rized persons interested in radio technique solely with a per-
sonal aim and without pecuniary interest.
(5) Amateur station. A station in an amateur radio service con-
sisting of the apparatus necessary for carrying on radio com-
munications.
(6) Automatic control. The use of devices and procedures for
control of a station when it is transmitting so that compli-
ance with the FCC Rules is achieved without the control
operator being present at a control point.
30 CHAPTER TWO
(7) Auxiliary station. An amateur station, other than in a message
forwarding system, that is transmitting communications point-
to-point within a system of cooperating amateur stations.
(8) Bandwidth. The width of a frequency band outside of which
the mean power of the transmitted signal is attenuated at
least 26 dB below the mean power of the transmitted signal
within the band.
(9) Beacon. An amateur station transmitting communications
for the observation of propagation and reception or other
related experimental activities.
(10) Broadcasting. Transmissions intended for reception by the
general public, either direct or relayed.
———————————————————————-
(12) Control Operator. An amateur operator designated by the
licensee of a station to be responsible for the transmissions
from that station to assure compliance with the FCC Rules.
(13) Control Point. The location at which the control operator
function is performed.
(14) CSCE. Certificate of successful completion of an examination.
———————————————————————-
(16) Earth Station. An amateur station located on or within 50 km
of the Earth’s surface intended for communications with
space stations or with other Earth stations by means of one
or more objects in space.
(17) EIC. Engineer in Charge of an FCC Field Facility.
———————————————————————-
(20) FAA. Federal Aviation Administration
———————————————————————-
(22) Frequency coordinator. An entity, recognized in a local or
regional area by amateur operators whose stations are eligi-
ble to be auxiliary or repeater stations, that recommends
transmitter/receive channels and associated operating and
technical parameters for such stations in order to avoid or
minimize potential interference.
(23) Harmful interference. Interference which endangers the
functioning of a radionavigation service or other safety ser-
vices or seriously degrades, obstructs, or repeatedly inter-
rupts a radiocommunication service operating in accordance
with the Radio Regulations.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 31
(24) Indicator. Words, letters or numerals appended to and
separated from the call sign during the station identifica-
tion.
(25) Information bulletin. A message directed only to amateur
operators consisting solely of subject matter of direct interest
to the amateur service.
(26) International Morse Code. A dot-dash code as defined in
International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Com-
mittee (CCITT) Recommendation F.1 (1984), Division B.I.
Morse Code.
(27) IARP. International Amateur Radio Permit
———————————————————————-
(30) Local control. The use of a control operator who directly
manipulates the operating adjustments in the station to
achieve compliance with the FCC Rules.
————————————————————————-
(37) RACES (radio amateur civil emergency service). A radio ser-
vice using amateur stations for civil defense communica-
tions during periods of local, regional, or national civil
emergencies.
(38) Remote control. The use of a control operator who indirectly
manipulates the operating adjustments in the station
through a control link to achieve compliance with the FCC
Rules.
(39) Repeater. An amateur station that simultaneously retrans-
mits the transmission of another amateur station on a differ-
ent channel or channels.
(40) Space station. An amateur station located more than 50 km
above the Earth’s surface.
—————————————————————————-
(42) Spurious emission. An emission, on frequencies outside the
necessary bandwidth of a transmission, the level of which
may be reduced without affecting the information being
transmitted.
——————————————————————————
(46) Third-party communications. A message from the control
operator (first party) of an amateur station to another ama-
teur station control operator (second party) on behalf of
another person (third party).
32 CHAPTER TWO
(47) ULS (Universal Licensing System). The (FCC) consolidated
database, application filing system, and processing system
for all Wireless Telecommunications Services.
(48) VE. Volunteer examiner.
(49) VEC. Volunteer-examiner coordinator.
(b) The definition of technical symbols used in this Part are:
(1) EHF (extremely high frequency). The frequency range of
30–300 GHz.1
(2) HF (high frequency). The frequency range 3–30 MHz
(3) Hz. Hertz
(4) m. Meters
(5) MF. (medium frequency). The frequency range 300–3000
kHz.
(6) PEP (peak envelope power). The average power supplied to
the antenna transmission line by a transmitter during one RF
cycle at the crest of the modulation envelope taken under
normal operating conditions.
(7) RF. Radio frequency
(8) SHF (super-high frequency). The frequency range is 3–30
GHz.
(9) UHF. (ultra-high frequency). The frequency range is
300–3000 MHz.
(10) VHF (very high frequency). The frequency range is 30–300
MHz.
(11) W. (watt)2
1
The frequency of 1 Hertz (Hz) is defined as one cycle per second. Voice, music, radio
transmission, AC power lines, and other signals are usually given in terms of operating
frequencies. For example, voice frequencies normally range from about 300 Hz to 3000
Hz. Power-line frequency in the United States is 60 Hz while those in countries such
as England and France are 50 Hz. You need to learn the frequency range definitions to
help you pass the FCC written examinations as well as their use during amateur oper-
ations. You will find that the frequencies of amateur bands can be expressed in kilo-
hertz (kHz), megahertz (MHz), or gigahertz (GHz), depending on the particular amateur
band.
1 kHz  1000 Hz.
1 MHz  1000 KHz  1,000,000 Hz.
1 GHz  1000 MHz  1,000,000,000 Hz.
2
The watt is a unit of electrical power.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 33
Part 97.3(c) defines the standard terms used to describe signal emis-
sion types from amateur radio transmitters. The signal types autho-
rized for Technicians are given as follows:
1. CW. Sometimes referred to as “continuous wave,” CW is defined as
the International Morse Code telegraphy, usually transmitted from
a radio transmitter via an operator using a hand key or automatic
keying device, sometimes generated by a computer.
2. RTTY. RTTY or radioteletypewriter direct-printing telegraph emis-
sions provide for transmission of mostly textual information. Older
mechanical teletypewriter equipment has a typewriter-like key-
board to generate messages composed primarily of alpha and
numeric characters along with generation of punctuation symbols
and end-of-line and line-feed control characters. RTTY electrical
signals, generated by the keyboards and connected to a printer to
print messages, consist of digital codes representing characters
such as letters or numbers. Only FCC specified codes (such as the
old 5-unit Baudot or the 7-unit ASCII codes) can be used for trans-
mitting RTTY signals. The newer personal computers can be used
to generate and receive RTTY signals. We’ll cover more on this sub-
ject in Chap. 11.
3. Data. Data represents a broad class of telemetry, telecommand, or
computer communications emissions. Here’s where the Technician
operators can use their PCs for such exciting transmission modes as
Packet and AMTOR. In general, the amateur operator is restricted to
the use of FCC-approved digital codes.
4. Phone. Phone, or voice communications, allows the Technician
operator to talk to other hams via local or long-distance contacts.
The Technician with 5 WPM certification, for example, can use sin-
gle-sideband voice on specified frequencies in the 10-meter band
and all voice modes on all amateur bands above 50 MHz.
5. Image. Image emission types include facsimile and television sig-
nals. Technician operators can experiment with these modes of
emission on all amateur bands above 50 MHz.
6. Spread spectrum. Spread-spectrum emissions involving “fre-
quency hopping” over a wide band of frequencies are authorized on
34 CHAPTER TWO
some of the higher UHF bands. This is a relatively new technology
for amateur operation.
AMATEUR STATION/OPERATOR LICENSE REGULATIONS
Part 97 contains the following FCC regulations concerning amateur
operator and station license requirements. You will find that the FCC
Amateur Radio License actually covers the operator privileges and the
station authorization—two separate licenses on one slip of paper! The
operator portion authorizes you to be the “control operator” of your
amateur station or another amateur’s station provided the station
owner gives you permission.
The combination FCC amateur license also authorizes you to have
your own amateur radio station.
Part 97.5 Station license required.
(a) The station apparatus must be under the physical control of a per-
son named in an amateur station license grant on the ULS consol-
idated license database or a person authorized for alien reciprocal
operation by Part 97.107 of this part, before the station may trans-
mit on any amateur service frequency from any place that is:
(1) Within 50 km of the Earth’s surface and at a place where the
amateur service is regulated by the FCC;
(2) Within 50 km of the Earth’s surface and aboard any vessel or
craft that is documented or registered in the United States; or
(3) More than 50 km above the Earth’s surface aboard any craft
that is documented or registered in the United States.
(b) The types of station license grants are:
(1) An operator/primary station license grant. One, but only one,
operator/primary station license grant may be held by any
one person. The primary station license is granted together
with the amateur operator license. Except for a representative
of a foreign government, any person who qualifies by exami-
nation is eligible to apply for an operator/primary station
license grant.
(2) A club station license grant. A club station license grant may
be held only by the person who is the license trustee desig-
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 35
nated by an officer of the club. The trustee must be a person
who holds an Amateur Extra, Advanced, General, Techni-
cian Plus, or Technician operator license grant. The club
must be composed of at least four persons and must have a
name, a document of organization, management, and a pri-
mary purpose devoted to amateur service activities consis-
tent with this part.
(3) A military recreation station license grant. A military recre-
ation station grant may be held only by the person who is the
license custodian designated by the official in charge of the
United States military recreation premises where the station
is situated. The person must not be a representative of a for-
eign government. The person need not hold an amateur
license grant.
(4) A RACES station grant license. A RACES station license
grant may be held only by the person who is the license cus-
todian designated by the official responsible for the govern-
ment agency served by that civil defense organization. The
custodian must be the civil defense official responsible for
coordination of all civil defense activities in the area con-
cerned. The custodian must not be a representative of a for-
eign government. The custodian need not hold an amateur
operator license grant.
Part 97.7 Control operation required. When transmitting, each
amateur station must have a control operator. The control operator
must be a person:
(a) For whom the amateur operator/primary station license grant
appears on the ULS consolidated license database, or
(b) Who is authorized for alien reciprocal operation by Part 97.107 of
this part.
Part 97.9 Operator license.
(a) The classes of amateur operation license grants are: Novice,
Technician, Technician Plus (until such licenses expire, a Tech-
36 CHAPTER TWO
nician Class license before February 14, 1991, is considered a
Technician Plus Class license), General, Advanced, and Amateur
Extra. The person named in the operator license grant is autho-
rized to be the control operator of an amateur station with the
privileges authorized to the operator class specified on the
license grant.
(b) The person named in an operator license grant of Novice, Techni-
cian, Technician Plus, General, or Advanced Class who has prop-
erly submitted to the administering VEs an FCC Form 605
document requesting examination for an operator license grant to
a higher class, and who holds a CSCE indicating that the person
has completed the necessary examinations within the previous
365 days, is authorized to exercise the rights and privileges of the
higher operator class until final disposition of the application or
until 365 days following the passing of the examination,
whichever comes first.
Part 97.13 Restrictions on station location.
(a) Before placing an amateur station on land of environmental
importance or that is significant in American history, architecture,
or culture, the licensee may be requested to take certain actions
prescribed by Para 1.1305-1.1319 of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended.
(b) A station within 1600 meters (1 mile) of an FCC monitoring facil-
ity must protect that facility from harmful interference.
(c) Before causing or allowing an amateur station to transmit from
any place where the operation of the station could cause human
exposure to RF electromagnetic field levels in excess of those
allowed under Part 1.1310 of this chapter, the licensee is required
to take certain actions:
(1) The licensee must perform the routine RF environmental
evaluation prescribed by Para 1.1307(b) of this chapter, if the
power of the licensee’s station exceeds the limits given in
the following table:
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 37
Evaluation required if
Wavelength Band power* (watts) exceeds:
MF 160 m 500
HF 80 m 500
75 m 500
40 m 500
30 m 425
20 m 225
17 m 125
15 m 100
12 m 75
10 m 50
VHF (all bands) 50
UHF 70 cm 70
33 cm 150
23 cm 200
13 cm 250
SHF (all bands) 250
EHF (all bands) 250
Repeater stations (all bands) non-building antenna: height (all bands)
above ground to lowest point of antenna
10 m and power 500 W ERP; building-
mounted antennas: power 500 W ERP
*Power  PEP (peak envelope power) input to antenna except for repeater stations only, power
exclusion is based on ERP (effective radiated power).
(2) If the routine environmental evaluation indicates that the RF
electromagnetic fields could exceed the limits contained in
Para 1.1310 of this chapter and is accessible to such electro-
magnetic fields. Further information on evaluating compli-
38 CHAPTER TWO
ance with these limits can be found in FCC OET Bulletin
Number 65, “Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines
for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic
Fields.”
Part 97.15 Station antenna structures.
(a) Owners of certain antenna structures more than 60.96 meters (200
feet) above ground level at the site or located near or at a public use
airport must notify the Federal Aviation Administration and regis-
ter with the Commission as required by Part 17 of this chapter.
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, a station antenna structure
may be erected at heights and dimensions sufficient to accommo-
date amateur service communications. (State and local regulation
of a station antenna structure must not preclude amateur service
communications. Rather, it must reasonably accommodate such
communications and must constitute the minimum practical reg-
ulation to accommodate the state or local authority’s legitimate
purpose. See PRB-1 FCC 2d 952 (1985) for details.)
Part 97.17 Application for new license grant.
(a) Any qualified person is eligible to apply for a new operator/primary
station, club station, or military recreation station license grant. No
new license grant will be issued for a Novice, Technician Plus, or
Advanced Class operator/primary station or RACES station.
(b) Each application for a new amateur service license grant must be
filed with the FCC as follows:
(1) Each candidate for an amateur radio operator license which
requires the applicant to pass one or more examination ele-
ments must present the administering VEs with all informa-
tion required by the rules prior to the examination. The VEs
may collect all necessary information in any manner of their
choosing, including creating their own forms.
(c) No person shall obtain or attempt to obtain, or assist another per-
son to obtain or attempt to obtain, an amateur service license by
fraudulent means.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 39
Part 97.21 Application for a modified or renewed license.
(a) A person holding a valid amateur station license:
(1) Must apply to the FCC for a modification of the license grant
as necessary to show the correct mailing address, licensee
name, club name, license trustee name or license custodian
name in accordance with Part 1.913 of this chapter. For a
club, military recreation, or RACES station license grant, it
must be presented in document form to a Club Station Call
Sign Administrator who must submit the information
thereon to the FCC in an electronic batch file. The Club Sta-
tion Call Sign Administrator must retain the collected infor-
mation for at least 15 months and make it available to the
FCC upon request.
(2) May apply to the FCC for a modification of the operator/
primary station license grant to show a higher operator
class. Applicants must present the administering VEs with
all information required by the rules prior to the examina-
tion. The VEs may collect all necessary information in
any manner of their choosing, including creating their own
forms.
(3) May apply to the FCC for renewal of the license grant for
another term in accordance with Part 1.913 of this chapter.
Application for renewal of a Technical Plus operator/pri-
mary station license will be processed as an application for
renewal of a Technician Class operator/primary station
license.
(b) A person whose amateur station license grant has expired may
apply to the FCC for renewal of the license grant for another term
during a two-year filing grace period. The application must be
received at the address specified above prior to the end of the
grace period. Unless and until the license grant is renewed, no
privileges in this Part are conferred.
Part 97.23 Mailing address. Each license grant must show the
grantee’s correct name and mailing address. The mailing address must
be in an area where the amateur service is regulated by the FCC and
40 CHAPTER TWO
where the grantee can receive mail delivery by the United States Postal
Service. Revocation of the station license or suspension of the operator
license may result when correspondence from the FCC is returned as
undeliverable because the grantee failed to provide the correct address.
Part 97.25 License term. An amateur service license is normally
granted for a 10-year term.
Part 97.29 Replacement license grant document. Each grantee
whose amateur station license grant document is lost, mutilated, or
destroyed may apply to the FCC for a replacement in accordance with
Para 1.913 of this chapter.
STATION OPERATING STANDARDS.
This section of Part 97 covers amateur radio station operating standards.
You will need to master these standards to help you pass the FCC exami-
nations and for effective operation of your amateur station.
Part 97.101 General standards.
(a) In all respects not specifically covered by FCC Rules each amateur
station must be operated in accordance with good engineering and
good amateur practice.
(b) Each station licensee and each control operator must cooperate in
selecting transmitting channels and in making the most effective
use of the amateur service frequencies. No frequency will be
assigned for the exclusive use of any station.
(c) At all times and on all frequencies, each control operator must
give priority to stations providing emergency communications,
except to stations transmitting communications for training drills
and tests in RACES.
(d) No amateur operator shall willfully or maliciously interfere with
or cause interference to any radio communication or signal.
Part 97.103 Station licensee responsibilities.
(a) The station licensee is responsible for the proper operation of the
station in accordance with FCC Rules. When the control operator
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 41
is a different amateur than the station licensee, both persons are
equally responsible for proper operation of the station.
(b) The station licensee must designate the station control operator.
The FCC will presume that the station licensee is also the control
operator, unless documentation to the contrary is in the station
records.
(c) The station licensee must make the station and the station records
available for inspection upon request by an FCC representative.
When deemed necessary by an EIC to assure compliance with the
FCC Rules, the station licensee must maintain a record of station
operation containing such items of information as the EIC may
require with Part 0.314(x) of the FCC Rules.
Part 97.105 Control operator duties.
(a) The control operator must ensure the immediate proper operation
of the station, regardless of the type of control.
(b) A station may only be operated in the manner and to the extent
permitted by the privileges authorized for the class of operator
license held by the control operator.
Part 97.109 Station control.
(a) Each amateur station must have at least one control point.
(b) When a station is being locally controlled, the control operator
must be at the control point. Any station may be locally con-
trolled.
(c) When a station is being remotely controlled, the control operator
must be at the control point. Any station may be remotely con-
trolled.
(d) When a station is being automatically controlled, the control oper-
ator need not be at the control point. Only stations specifically
designated elsewhere in this Part may be automatically con-
trolled. Automatic control must cease upon notification by an EIC
that the station is transmitting improperly or causing harmful
interference to other stations. Automatic control must not be
resumed without prior approval of the FCC.
42 CHAPTER TWO
(e) No station may be automatically controlled while transmitting
third party communications, except a station transmitting a RTTY
or data emission. All messages that are retransmitted must origi-
nate at a station that is being locally or remotely controlled.
Part 97.111 Authorized transmissions.
(a) An amateur station may transmit the following types of two-way
communications:
(1) Transmissions necessary to exchange messages with other
stations in the amateur service, except those in any country
whose administration has given public notice to such com-
munications. The FCC will issue public notices of current
arrangements for international communications.
(2) Transmissions necessary to exchange messages with a sta-
tion in another FCC-regulated service, while providing
emergency communications.
(3) Transmissions necessary to exchange messages with a
United States Government station, necessary to providing
communications with RACES.
(4) Transmissions necessary to exchange messages with a sta-
tion not regulated by the FCC, but authorized by the FCC to
communicate with amateur stations. An amateur station
may exchange messages with a participating United States
military station during Armed Forces Day Communications
Test.
(b) In addition to one-way transmissions specifically authorized else-
where in this Part, an amateur station may transmit the following
types of one-way communications:
(1) Brief transmissions necessary to make adjustments to the
station.
(2) Brief transmissions necessary to establishing two-way com-
munications with other stations.
(3) Telecommand.
(4) Transmissions necessary to providing emergency communi-
cations.
(5) Transmissions necessary to assisting persons learning, or
improving proficiency in, the international Morse code.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 43
(6) Transmissions necessary to disseminate information bul-
letins.
(7) Transmission of telemetry.
Part 97.113 Prohibited transmissions.
(a) No amateur station shall transmit:
(1) Communications specifically prohibited elsewhere in this
Part.
(2) Communications for hire or for material compensation,
direct or indirect, paid or promised, except as otherwise pro-
vided in these rules.
(3) Communications in which the station licensee or control
operator has a pecuniary interest, including communica-
tions on behalf of an employer. Amateur operators may,
however, notify other operators of the availability for sale
or trade of apparatus normally used in an amateur station,
provided that such activity is not conducted on a regular
basis.
(4) Music using a phone emission except as specifically pro-
vided elsewhere in this Section; communications intended
to facilitate a criminal act; messages in codes or ciphers
intended to obscure the meaning thereof, except as other-
wise provided herein; obscene or indecent words or lan-
guage; of false or deceptive messages, signals, or
identification.
(5) Communications on a regular basis which could reasonably
be furnished alternately through other radio services.
(b) An amateur station shall not engage in any form of broadcasting,
nor may an amateur station transmit one-way communications
except as specifically provided in these rules; nor shall an ama-
teur station engage in any activity related to program production
or news gathering for broadcasting purposes, except that commu-
nications directly related to the immediate safety of human life or
the protection of property may be provided by amateur stations to
broadcasters, for dissemination to the public where no other
means of communication is reasonably available before or at the
time of the event.
44 CHAPTER TWO
(c) A control operator of a club station may accept compensation as
an incident of a teaching position during periods of time when an
amateur station is used by that teacher as a part of classroom
instruction at an educational institution.
(d) The control operator of a club station may accept compensation for
the periods of time when the station is transmitting telegraphy
practice or information bulletins, provided that the station trans-
mits such telegraphy practice and bulletins for at least 40 hours per
week and schedules operations on at least six amateur service MF
and HF bands using reasonable measures to maximize coverage,
where the schedule of normal operating times and frequencies is
published at least 30 days in advance of the actual transmissions
and where the control operator does not accept any direct or indi-
rect compensation for any other service as a control operator.
(e) No station shall transmit programs or signals emanating from any
type of radio station other than an amateur station, except propa-
gation and weather forecast information intended for use by the
general public and originating from United States Government
stations and communications, including incidental music, origi-
nating on United States Government frequencies between a space
shuttle and its associated Earth stations. Prior approval for shuttle
retransmissions must be obtained from the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. Such retransmissions must be for the
exclusive use of amateur operators. Propagation, weather fore-
casts, and shuttle retransmissions may not be conducted on a reg-
ular basis, but only occasionally, as an incident of normal amateur
radio communications.
(f) No amateur station, except an auxiliary, repeater, or space station,
may automatically retransmit the radio signals of other amateur
stations.
Part 97.115 Third party communications.
(a) An amateur station may transmit messages for a third party to:
(1) Any station within the jurisdiction of the United States.
(2) Any station within the jurisdiction of a foreign government
whose administration has made arrangements with the
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 45
United States to allow amateur stations to be used for trans-
mitting international communications on behalf of third par-
ties. No station shall transmit messages for a third party to
any station within the jurisdiction of any foreign government
whose administration has not made such an arrangement.
This prohibition does not apply to a message for any third
party who is eligible to be a control operator of the station.
(b) The third party may participate in stating the message where:
(1) The control party is present at the control point and is con-
tinuously monitoring and supervising the third party’s par-
ticipation.
(2) The third party is not a prior amateur service licensee whose
license was revoked; suspended for less than the balance of
the license term and the suspension is still in effect; sus-
pended for the balance of the license term and relicensing
has not taken place; or surrendered for cancellation follow-
ing notice of revocation, suspension, or monetary forfeiture
proceedings. The third party may not be the subject of a
cease and desist order which relates to amateur service oper-
ation and which is still in effect.
(c) At the end of an exchange of international third party communi-
cations, the station must also transmit in the station identification
procedure the call sign of the station with which a third party
message was exchanged.
Part 97.119 Station identification.
(a) Each amateur station, except a space station or telecommand sta-
tion, must transmit its assigned call station on its transmitting
channel at the end of each communication, and at least every 10
minutes during a transmission, for the purpose of clearly making
the source of the transmission from the station known to those
receiving the transmissions. No station may transmit unidentified
communications or signals, or transmit as the station call sign,
any call sign not authorized to the station.
(b) The call sign must be transmitted with an emission authorized for
the transmitting channel in one of the following ways:
46 CHAPTER TWO
(1) By a CW emission. When keyed by an automatic device used
only for identification, the speed must not exceed 20 words
per minute;
(2) By a phone emission in the English language. Use of a stan-
dard phonetic alphabet as an aid for correct station identifi-
cation is encouraged;
(3) By a RTTY emission using a specified digital code when all
or part of the communications are transmitted by a RTTY or
data emission;
(4) By an image emission conforming to the applicable trans-
mission standards, either color or monochrome, of Part
73.682(a) of the FCC Rules, when all or part of the commu-
nications are transmitted in the same image emission.
(c) One or more indicators may be included with the call sign. Each
indicator must be separated from the call sign by the slant mark (/)
or by any suitable word that denotes the slant mark. If an indica-
tor is self-assigned, it must be included before, after, or both before
and after the call sign. No self-assigned indicator may conflict
with any other indicator specified by the FCC Rules or with any
prefix assigned to another country.
(d) When transmitting in conjunction with an event of special signif-
icance, a station may substitute for its assigned call sign a special
event call sign as shown for that station for that period of time on
the common database, maintained and disseminated by the spe-
cial event call sign database coordinators. Additionally, the sta-
tion must transmit its assigned call sign at least once per hour
during such transmissions.
(e) When the operator license class held by the control operator
exceeds that of the station licensee, an indicator consisting of the
call sign assigned to the control operator’s station must be
included after the call sign.
(f) When the control operator is exercising the rights and privileges
authorized by Part 97.9(b), an indicator must be included after the
call sign as follows:
(1) For a control operator who has requested a license modifica-
tion from Novice to Technician Class: KT
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 47
(2) For a control operator who has requested a license modifica-
tion from Novice or Technician Class to General Class: AG
(3) For a control operator who has requested a license modifica-
tion from Novice, Technician, or General Class operator to
Advanced Class: AA; or
(4) For a control operator who has requested a license modifica-
tion from Novice, Technician, General, or Advanced Class
operator to Amateur Extra Class: AE
Part 97.121 Restricted operation.
(a) If the operation of an amateur station causes general interference
to the reception of transmissions from stations operating in the
domestic broadcast service where receivers of good engineering
design, including adequate selectivity characteristics, are used to
receive such transmissions, and this fact is made known to the
amateur station licensee, the amateur station shall not be operated
during the hours from 8 p.m. to 10:30 p.m., local time, and on
Sunday for the additional period from 10:30 a.m. until 1 p.m.,
local time, upon the frequency or frequencies used when the
interference is created.
(b) In general, such steps as may be necessary to minimize interfer-
ence to stations operating in other services may be required after
investigation by the FCC.
Part 97.203 Beacon station.
(a) Any amateur station licensed to a holder of a Technician, Techni-
cian Plus, General, Advanced, or Amateur Extra operator license
may be a beacon. A holder of a Technician, Technician Plus, Gen-
eral, Advanced, or Amateur Extra Class operator license may be
the control operator of a beacon, subject to the privileges of the
class of operator license held.
(b) A beacon must not currently transmit on more than one channel
in the same amateur service frequency band, from the same sta-
tion location.
(c) The transmitting power of a beacon must not exceed 100 W.
48 CHAPTER TWO
(d) A beacon may be automatically controlled while it is transmitting
on the 28.20–28.30 MHz, 50.06–50.08 MHz, 144.275–144.300
MHz, 222.05–222.06 MHz, and 432.300––432.400 MHz segments,
or on the 33 cm and shorter wavelength bands.
(g) A beacon may transmit one-way communications.
Part 97.205 Repeater stations.
(a) Any amateur station licensed to a holder of a Technician, General,
Advanced, or Amateur Extra Class operator license may be a
repeater. A holder of a Technician, General, Advanced, or Amateur
Extra Class operator license may be the control operator of a repeater,
subject to the privileges of the class of operator license held.
(b) A repeater may receive and transmit only on the 10 m and shorter
wavelength frequency bands except the 28.0–29.5 MHz, 50.0–51.0
MHz, 144.0–144.5 MHz, 145.5–146.0 MHz, 222.00–222.15 MHz,
431.0–433.0 MHz, and 435.0–438.0 MHz segments.
(c) When the transmissions of a repeater cause harmful interference to
another repeater, the two station licensees are equally and fully
responsible for resolving the interference unless the operation of one
station is recommended by a frequency coordinator and the opera-
tion of the other is not. In that case, the licensee of the noncoordi-
nated repeater has primary responsibility to resolve the interference.
(d) A repeater may be automatically controlled.
(e) Ancillary functions of a repeater that are available to users on the
input channel are not considered remotely controlled functions of
that station. Limiting the use of a repeater to only certain user sta-
tions is permissible.
(g) The control operator of a repeater that retransmits inadvertently
communications that violate the rules in this Part is not account-
able for the violative communications.
Part 97.207 Space station.
(a) Any amateur station may be a space station. A holder of any class
operator license may be the control operator of a space station,
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 49
subject to the privileges of the class of operator license held by the
control operator.
(b) A space station must be capable of effecting a cessation of trans-
missions by telecommand whenever such cessation is ordered by
the FCC.
(c) The following frequency bands and segments are authorized to
space stations:
(1) The 17 m, 15 m, 12 m, and 10 m bands, 6 mm, 2 mm, and 1
mm bands; and
(2) The 7.0–7.1 MHz, 14.00–14.25 MHz, 144–146 MHz, 435–438
MHz, 1260–1270 MHz, and 2400–2450 MHz; and 3.40–3.41
GHz, 5.83–5.85 GHz, 10.45–10.50 GHz, and 2400–2405 GHz
segments.
(d) A space station may automatically retransmit the radio signals of
Earth stations and other space stations.
(e) A space station may transmit one-way communications.
Part 97.215 Telecommand of model craft. An amateur station
transmitting signals to control a model craft may be operated as fol-
lows:
(a) The station identification procedure is not required for transmis-
sions directed only to the model craft, provided that a label indi-
cating the station call sign and the station licensee’s name and
address is affixed to the station transmitter.
(b) The control signals are not considered codes or ciphers intended
to obscure the meaning of the communication.
(c) The transmitter power must not exceed 1 W.
Part 97.307 Emission standards.
(a) No amateur station transmission shall occupy more bandwidth
than necessary for the information rate and emission type being
transmitted, in accordance with good amateur practices.
(b) Emissions resulting from modulation must be confined to the
band or segment available to the control operator. Emissions
50 CHAPTER TWO
outside the necessary bandwidth must not cause splatter or
keyclick interference to operations on adjacent frequencies.
(c) All spurious emissions from a station transmitter must be reduced
to the greatest extent practicable. If any spurious emission,
including chassis or power line radiation, causes harmful inter-
ference to the reception of another radio station, the licensee of
the interfering amateur station is required to take steps to elimi-
nate the interference, in accordance with good engineering prac-
tice.
(d) The mean power of any spurious emission from a station trans-
mitter or external RF power amplifier transmitting on a frequency
below 30 MHz must not exceed 50 MW and must be at least 40 dB
below the mean power of the fundamental emission. For a trans-
mitter of mean power less than 5 W, the attenuation must be at
least 30 dB. A transmitter built before April 15, 1977, or first mar-
keted before January 1, 1978, is exempt from this requirement.
(e) The mean power of any spurious emission from a station trans-
mitter or external RF power amplifier transmitting on a frequency
between 30–225 MHz must be at least 60 dB below the mean
power of the fundamental. For a transmitter having a mean power
of 25 W or less, the mean power of any spurious emission sup-
plied to the antenna transmission line must not exceed 25 W (25
microwatts) and must be at least 40 dB below the mean power of
the fundamental emission, but need not be reduced below the
power of 10 W. A transmitter built before April 15, 1977, or first
marketed before January 1, 1978, is exempt from this requirement.
(f) The following standards and limitations apply to transmissions
on the frequencies specified in Part 97.305 of this Part:
(1) No angle-modulation (equivalent to frequency modulation)
emission may have a modulation index greater that 1 at the
highest modulating frequency.
(2) No non-phone emission shall exceed the bandwidth of a
communications quality phone emission of the same modu-
lation type. The total bandwidth of an independent side-
band emission (having B as the first symbol), or a
multiplexed image and phone emission, shall not exceed
that of a communications quality A3E emission.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 51
(3) Only a RTTY or data emission having a specified digital
code listed in Part 97.309(a) of this part may be transmitted.
The symbol rate must not exceed 300 bauds, or for fre-
quency-shift keying, the frequency shift between mark and
space must not exceed 1 kHz.
Notes:
1. This section includes the FCC’s technical specifications for modu-
lation characteristics involving voice (phone), RTTY (radio teletype-
writer) and data, and image emissions. The defining lines between
RTTY and data forms of communications radio have become some-
what blurred since RTTY, data, and some imaging (TV) signals repre-
sent digital signals. For example, one manufacturer markets a
multimode data controller that can be connected between your ham
radio and personal computer. This controller processes the following
signals: Packet, PACTOR, AMTOR, RTTY, Color SSTV TV, FAX,
Weather, ASCII, Navtex, CW, and Memory Keyer. Don’t worry about all
these complex abbreviations—you’ll learn all of them as you progress
in amateur radio. We’ll cover the ones you need to know for the Tech-
nician Examination.
2. RTTY and digital code transmission rates are measured in either
bauds or bits per second. A baud may be thought of as a signal transi-
tion rate, e.g., 300 baud represents 300 signal transitions per second.
One or more digital bits (usually designated as “ones” or “zeros,” or 1s
and 0s) may be encoded in each signal transition. Thus 1200 baud may
represent 1200 bits per second for one communications system or 4800
bits per second in another communications system. The second system
provides for 4 bits being transmitted during each baud transition.
3. The FCC Rules restrict the baud rates in the lower amateur bands
(mostly HF bands) while permitting higher baud rates in the higher
bands (VHF and UHF). However, Technician Class Amateur operators
are permitted RTTY and data privileges only above 50 MHz. The max-
imum baud (or symbol) rate for the 2-meter and 6-meter bands is 19.6
kilobauds.
Part 97.313 Transmitter power standards.
(a) An amateur station must use the minimum transmitter power nec-
essary to carry out the desired communications.
52 CHAPTER TWO
(b) No station may transmit with a power exceeding 1.5 kW PEP.
(c) No station may transmit with a power exceeding 200 W PEP on:
(1) The 3.675–3.725 MHz, 7.10–7.15 MHz, 10.10–10.15 MHz,
and 21.1–21.2 MHz segments;
(2) The 28.1–28.5 MHz segment when the control operator is a
Novice Class operator or a Technician Class operator who
has received credit for proficiency in telegraphy in accor-
dance with the international requirements; or
(3) The 7.050–7.075 MHz segment when the station is within
ITU Regions 1 and 3.
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS.
The FCC is very specific when it comes to emergency communica-
tions. As you may remember, Part 97.1(1) clearly states that one major
justification for the existence of the Amateur Service is its ability to
provide communications during emergency conditions and public ser-
vice events.
Part 97.401 Operation during a disaster.
(a) When normal communications are overloaded, damaged, or dis-
rupted because a disaster has occurred, or is likely to occur, in an
area where the amateur service is regulated by the FCC, an ama-
teur station may make transmissions necessary to meet essential
communications needs and facilitate relief actions.
(b) When normal communications systems are overloaded, damaged,
or disrupted because a natural disaster has occurred, or is likely to
occur, in an area where the amateur service is not regulated by the
FCC, a station assisting in meeting essential communications
needs and facilitating relief actions may do so only in accordance
with ITU3 Resolution No. 640 (Geneva, 1979). The 80 m, 75 m, 40
3
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU), an agency of the United Nations,
coordinates and establishes radio frequency allocations on a worldwide basis. Region
1 covers Europe, the African Continent, and all of Russia; Region 2 covers the Western
Hemisphere, including North and South America, Greenland, and Hawaii; and Region
3 covers the Far East, including China, Japan, Indonesia, Australia, India, and Pakistan.
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 53
m, 30 m, 20 m, 17 m, 15 m, 12 m, and 2 m bands may be used for
these purposes.
(c) When a disaster disrupts normal communications systems in a
particular area, the FCC may declare a temporary state of commu-
nications emergency. The declaration will set forth any special
conditions and special rules to be observed by stations during the
communications emergency. A request for a declaration of a tem-
porary state of emergency should be directed to the RIC in the area
concerned.
(d) A station in or within 92.5 km of Alaska may transmit emissions
J3E and R3E on the channel of 5.1675 MHz for emergency com-
munications. The channel must be shared with stations licensed
in the Alaska private fixed service. The transmitter power must
not exceed 150 watts.
Part 97.405 Station in distress.
(a) No provisions of these rules prevent the use by an amateur station
in distress of any means at its disposal to attract attention, make
known its condition and location, and obtain assistance.
(b) No provisions of these rules prevent the use of a station, in the
exceptional circumstances described in paragraph (a), of any
means of radiocommunications at its disposal to assist a station in
distress.
HOW TO QUALIFY FOR AN FCC AMATEUR RADIO OPERATOR
LICENSE
Part2 97.501 through 97.527 describes the processes involved in
applying for the entry- and advanced-level amateur licenses. The spe-
cific telegraphy (or Morse code) tests and written examinations,
known as “elements,” were summarized in Table 2.1. If you are plan-
ning to become a ham, you’ll want to review this table carefully to
become familiar with the entry-level class license—i.e., the Techni-
cian Class—requirements. You may elect to start with the No-Code
Technician Class license and enjoy some activity with 2-meter and
440-centimeter repeaters, as well as attending local ham club meetings.
54 CHAPTER TWO
However, if you have an opportunity to also prepare for the Element 1
Morse code test and the Element 2 written examination for the Tech-
nician Class license, this is the best of both worlds. For example, code
and theory ham classes offered by the local ham club present an ideal
approach to preparing for Elements 1 and 2 examinations.
Prior to 1984, the FCC administered amateur radio exam at selected
FCC facilities throughout the country. Since that time, the FCC has
delegated the administration of all amateur radio examinations to
qualifying (or accredited) amateurs and amateur organizations such as
the ARRL and the W5YI Group. The amateurs who perform this testing
function are known as volunteer examiners (VEs). The following sec-
tions of Part 97 govern the amateur testing sessions for all Technician
(and higher) Class license examinations.
Part 97.501 Qualifying for an amateur operator license. Each
applicant must pass an examination for a new amateur operator
license grant and for each change in operator class. Each applicant for
the class of operator license grant specified below must pass, or other-
wise receive examination credit for, the following examination ele-
ments:
(a) Amateur Extra Class operator: Elements 1, 2, 3, and 4;
(b) General Class operator: Elements 1, 2, and 3;
(c) Technician Class operator: Element 2.
Part 97.503 Element standards.
(a) A telegraphy examination must be sufficient to prove that the
examinee has the ability to send correctly by hand and to receive
correctly by ear texts in the international Morse code at not less
than the prescribed speed, using the letters of the alphabet,
numerals 0–9, period comma, question mark, slant mark, and
prosigns AR, BT, and SK:
(1) Element 1: 5 words per minute.
(b) A written examination must be sufficient to prove that the exami-
nee possesses the operational and technical qualifications
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 55
required to perform properly the duties of an amateur service
licensee. Each written examination must be comprised of a ques-
tion set as follows:
(1) Element 2: 35 questions concerning the privileges of a Tech-
nician Class operator license. The minimum passing score is
26 questions answered correctly.
(2) Element 3: 35 questions concerning the privileges of a Gen-
eral Class operator license. The minimum passing score is 26
questions answered correctly.
(3) Element 4: 50 questions concerning the privileges of a Ama-
teur Extra Class operator license. The minimum passing
score is 37 questions answered correctly.
Amateur Call-Sign Allocations
The FCC assigns a unique amateur radio call sign to each licensed sta-
tion. Once you receive your call sign, you can retain it for life if you
want to. However, call signs are issued based on the class of license
and the geographical location. When upgrading to a higher license
class such as the Amateur Extra, you may want to request the presti-
gious call sign assigned to that class of licenses!
The amateur call sign consists of three separate sections: a prefix of
one or two letters (the first one or two letters), a number ranging from
0 to 9 in the center of the call sign, and a suffix of one to three letters
at the end of the call sign.
The prefix and the suffix provide an indication of the license
class—Amateur Extra, Advanced, General, Technician, or Novice. The
numbers and specific letters (L, P, H) serving as the second letter in the
prefix identify the geographical location of the amateur station. Letters
other than L, P, and H, used in the second location of the prefix, per-
mit the numbers 1 through 10 to identify regions within the continen-
tal United States. Table 2.2 lists specific numeral designators for
amateur call signs. To distinguish between numbers assigned to conti-
nental U.S. regions (i.e., within the 48 states), Alaska and overseas
U.S. locations, the second letter in the prefix is used to provide an
indicator. Here is the key to this designator:
TABLE 2.2 FCC Call-Sign Regions and Designators
Region Numeral Geographical area
1 1 Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont
2 2 New Jersey and New York
3 3 Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and the District of Columbia
4 4 Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, North Carolina, South Carolina, Ten-
nessee, and Virginia
5 5 Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas
6 6 California
7 7 Arizona, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming
8 8 Michigan, Ohio, and West Virginia
9 9 Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin
10 0 Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, and
South Dakota
11 7–9 Alaska
12 Caribbean area:
1 Navassa Island
2 Virgin Islands
3–4 Puerto Rico (except Desecheo Island)
5 Desecheo Island
13 Hawaii and Pacific islands:
0 Northern Mariana islands
1 Baker or Howland Island
2 Guam
3 Johnston Island
4 Midway Island
5 Palmyra or Jarvis Island; followed by suffix letter K: Kingman Reef
6–7 Hawaii; 7 followed by suffix K: Kure Island
8 American Samoa
9 Wake, Pearl, or Wilkes islands
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 57
Designator Region Geographical location
L 11 Alaska
P 12 Caribbean islands
H 13 Hawaii and Pacific islands
AMATEUR EXTRA CLASS CALL SIGNS
Call signs authorized for Amateur Extra Class stations in the continen-
tal United States (Regions 1–10) use a 1   2 format using K, N, or W as
the prefix and a two letter suffix; a 2   1 format using A, N, K, or W as
the first letter in the prefix; and a 2   2 format with an A as the first
letter in the prefix. Examples of call signs for the Amateur Extra Class
licensees from Texas are N5RA and AA5KB.
Call signs authorized for Amateur Extra Class stations in areas
outside the continental United States use unique letter identifiers in
the second position of a two-letter prefix. In Regions 11, 12, and 13,
a special identifier is inserted after the first letter of the prefix. Two-
letter suffixes are currently being used. Here are examples of Ama-
teur Extra call signs for stations located outside of the continental
United States:
Region 11: Prefixes of AL, Kl, NL, or WL
Example: KL7H (Alaska)
Region 12: Prefixes of KP, NP, or WP
Example: WP3X (Puerto Rico)
Region 13: Prefixes of AH, KH, NH, or WH
Example: AH4L (Midway Island)
ADVANCED CLASS CALL SIGNS
Although these call signs, a 2   2 format, are no longer issued by the
FCC as of May 15, 2000, holders of current Advanced Class licenses
may retain their licenses indefinitely. The first letter of the prefix may
use K, N, or W. Advanced Class licensees who live outside of the con-
tinental United States will use the prefixes AL, KP, or AH to identify
locations in Alaska, islands in the Caribbean, and islands in the
Pacific, respectively.
58 CHAPTER TWO
GENERAL, TECHNICIAN, AND TECHNICIAN WITH HF PRIVILEGES
CALL SIGNS
Call signs for these licensees use a 1   3 format with the first letter of
the prefix being a K, N, or W letter. The General or Technician Class
licensees located outside of the continental United States will be
issued call signs with a 2   3 format with prefixes KL, NL, or WL
(Region 11); NP or WP (Region 12); and KH, NH, or WH (Region 13).
This latter group applies to locations in Alaska, islands in the
Caribbean, and islands in the Pacific, respectively.
NOVICE, CLUB, AND MILITARY RECREATION STATION CALL SIGNS
Although these call signs, a 2   3 format, are no longer issued by the
FCC as of May 15, 2000, holders of current Novice Class licenses may
retain their licenses indefinitely. Novice Class licensees located outside
of the continental United States were issued call signs with a 2   3 for-
mat with prefixes KL, NL, or WL (Region 11); NP or WP (Region 12); and
KH, NH, or WH (Region 13). This latter group applies to locations in
Alaska, islands in the Caribbean, and islands in the Pacific, respectively.
How to Learn International Morse Code
If you plan to enter the exciting realm of amateur radio via the Techni-
cian Class with HF privileges, the FCC requires that you develop a 5
word per minute (5 WPM) proficiency in Morse code. This first step can
be easy and fun—or it can be difficult and a burden, depending upon
your attitude and study habits. You can get off to a good start in amateur
radio by developing a sound plan of attack for learning the Morse code.
And remember, code (or CW) transmissions will be your means for con-
tacting fellow hams all over the United States and in foreign countries.
One final comment: 5 words per minute is a slow code speed. By
the time you have learned the Morse code, you normally have devel-
oped a 5 WPM proficiency. To begin learning this new language, let’s
get started with a complete review of Morse code.
What is Morse Code?
International Morse code, consisting of a series of dits (dots) and dahs,
(dashes), is a universal language complete in itself. It affords a means
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 59
of communication between amateur operators on a worldwide basis.
The simplicity of International Morse code transmission is the key to
its tremendous power. It provides you with two very important advan-
tages in radio communications: low-cost equipment for transmitting
and receiving, and the most reliable means of communication. Weak
code signals at the threshold of noise can be copied by experienced
operators when radiotelephone signals are completely unintelligible.
The international Morse code uses individual combinations of dits
and dahs to represent the 26 letters of the alphabet, the 10 numerals (0
through 9), and a group of special symbols and abbreviated expres-
sions. Other texts refer to the combinations of dits and dahs as dots
and dashes. However, educational research has shown that we learn
code faster and more efficiently if the sounds of the code combinations
are associated with the particular characters rather than having to
memorize each character in terms of dots and dashes. By learning code
as dots and dashes, the mind then has to translate the dot-and-dash
combinations to the required character. But by using the dit and dah
approach, the mind can skip the intermediate step of translation. All
but the last dit of a code combination are normally shortened to “di”.
For example, the letter H would be “di-di-di-dit.” The letter R would
be represented by “di-dah-dit.” Table 2.3 provides a complete list of
the recommended International Morse code characters set for amateur
radio communications.
How code is transmitted
Ideal code is always transmitted in dits and dahs of uniform lengths
with uniform spaces between them. The spacing between individual
characters and words is also established at uniform units of time to
permit proper spacing of the received message. Figure 2.3 shows
examples of the proper spacing for the coded characters and words.
This standard is normally used by all proficient amateur and commer-
cial operators. One exception to this standard is that some code prac-
tice cassette tapes and phonograph records employ a constant
character transmission rate of about 13 WPM and the spacing between
characters will be lengthened to permit the effective rate of transmis-
sion to be slowed down for learning purposes. Some tapes and records
using this approach will provide for recorded code practice sessions of
about 5, 7, and 10 WPM, though each individual character is sent at
TABLE 2.3 Recommended International Morse code for amateur radio
operation
Letters
A di-dah J di-dah-dah-dah S di-di-dit
B dah-di-di-dit K dah-di-dah T dah
C dah-di-dah-dit L di-dah-di-dit U di-di-dah
D dah-di-dit M dah-dah V di-di-di-dah
E dit N dah-dit W di-dah-dah
F di-di-dah-dit O dah-dah-dah X dah-di-di-dah
G dah-dah-dit P di-dah-dah-dit Y dah-di-dah-dah
H di-di-di-dit Q dah-dah-di-dah Z dah-dah-di-dit
I di-dit R di-dah-dit
Numbers
1 di-dah-dah-dah-dah 6 dah-di-di-di-dit
2 di-di-dah-dah-dah 7 dah-dah-di-di-dit
3 di-di-di-dah-dah 8 dah-dah-dah-di-dit
4 di-di-di-dah 9 dah-dah-dah-dah-dit
5 di-di-di-di-dit 0 dah-dah-dah-dah-dah
Punctuation marks and special characters
Period (.) di-dah-di-dah-di-dah
Wait (AS) di-dah-di-di-dit
Comma (,) dah-dah-di-di-dah-dah
Pause (BT) dah-di-di-di-dah
Question mark (?) di-di-dah-dah-di-dit
Invitation to Transmit (K) dah-di-dah
Fraction Bar (/) dah-di-di-dah-dit
End of Message (AR) di-dah-di-dah-dit
Error in Transmission di-di-di-di-di-dit
End of Work (VA) di-di-di-dah-di-dah
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 61
the rate of about 13 WPM. The advantage to this approach is that the
beginner learns the sounds of the 13 WPM characters early in his or
her amateur career. For many Novice operators, this is an effective way
to progress to the 13 WPM code requirement for the General license.
Most International Morse code signals are transmitted as CW or
continuous-wave transmissions. Bursts of CW radiofrequency energy
are produced by alternately keying on and off the transmitter carrier
frequency according to the coded character combinations of dits
and dahs.
Who can learn Morse code?
Although some individuals adapt to the code faster than others, almost
everyone can master this fascinating language. The age and educa-
tional level of the individual are not significant factors. In fact, some
psychological studies indicate that children under the age of 10 will
adapt to code faster than adolescents or adults. The ranks of amateur
Time spacing requirement for International Morse code characters and words.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
0 5 10 15 20 25

1
Units
Letter "Y"

3 Units
Character interval — units of time

3
Units
S U N
Spacing between characters — units of time

5 Units
I AM
Spacing between words — units of time
0 5 10 15 20 25
F I G U R E 2 . 3
62 CHAPTER TWO
radio range from those less than 10 years of age to those in their 80s
and 90s.
Most people can learn the code in about 10 hours. With another 10
to 20 hours of practice, the average individual can achieve a code pro-
ficiency adequate to pass the Novice Class 5 WPM code test. Experi-
ence has shown that a code proficiency of about 6 to 7 WPM is
necessary to ensure that the applicant will pass the Novice code test.
The emotional stress encountered in taking a code test tends to reduce
the individual’s code proficiency by some 2 to 3 WPM, so prepare by
practicing at a speed higher than 5 WPM.
LEARNING PLATEAUS
Almost all individuals will experience learning plateaus or periods of
time when they cannot seem to progress to higher code speeds. The
human mind appears to form mental blocks at code speeds which vary
from individual to individual. These plateaus may appear at represen-
tative speeds of 6–7, 8–10, 14–16, or 18–20 WPM, or at higher speeds.
You may encounter these learning plateaus at several phases in your
quest to increase your code speed. However, the average Technician
applicant does not normally encounter any plateaus in his/her pro-
gression to a speed of 6 to 7 WPM. Later on if you opt for a faster code
proficiency, you may experience these learning plateaus. By being
aware of this potential problem—common to most amateurs—you will
be prepared to cope with it.
Fortunately, there is a solution to the learning-plateau problem—
practice and more practice. After several days of effort, you will find
that the problem will suddenly disappear and you will be able to copy
traffic at the higher speeds.
SCHEDULE PRACTICE SESSIONS
A mandatory requirement for successful code proficiency is a periodic
routine practice schedule. You must establish an adequate schedule
for code practice sessions and rigidly adhere to this schedule. Experi-
ence in teaching numerous code and theory classes has shown that the
failure to practice code at routine intervals is the primary factor in fail-
ing to achieve the Technician Class with HF privileges license. The
secret to learning the code is practice, practice, and more practice.
As a minimum, you should be prepared to devote about one hour
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 63
per day, seven days per week, to code practice. It is important that this
be a continuous schedule. Missing one or two days will probably
result in a loss of code proficiency. It is also equally important that you
avoid operating fatigue by taking breaks of about 5 to 10 minutes,
spaced evenly throughout each session. Research in educational tech-
niques indicates that the average individual’s attention span in such
activity is about 15 to 20 minutes.
Many excellent code training aids are available from a variety of
sources. A code-practice oscillator, a hand key, and a source of code-
practice signals are considered essential tools for learning to send and
receive International Morse code. Any amateur radio journal will offer
sources for all of these training aids. They are also available from most
local radio parts stores.
A simple code oscillator consisting of a high-frequency buzzer or an
electronic audio oscillator with a loudspeaker are available as kits or
completed items. Building and assembling an audio oscillator is an
excellent first project for your Technician career. Some amateur equip-
ment suppliers offer combination audio oscillator–hand key units. Fig-
ure 2.4 shows the MFJ Enterprises, Inc., Model MFJ-557 Code Practice
Oscillator, which can be used for individ-
ual as well as group code practice sessions.
It is battery powered and has a small inter-
nal speaker. An alternate approach is to
build a “home-brew” code-practice oscilla-
tor using the popular Signetics NE555 inte-
grated-circuit (IC) timing chip. (Other
integrated-circuit companies may offer a
direct substitute for the Signetics NE555.)
Figure 2.5 provides a schematic diagram
for this code oscillator. Parts for this
device, including a small cabinet or chas-
sis, are available from local radio parts
stores. A single 9-volt transistor battery
will power this code oscillator for many
hours of operation.
A standard radio telegraphy hand key
of heavy construction is recommended
for code training and later for Technician
The MFJ-557 Code Practice Oscillator. This versatile
device has a Morse key and audio oscillator unit
mounted on a heavy steel base. The oscillator sec-
tion features battery operation, internal speaker
with earphone jack for private listening, and vol-
ume and tone controls. The key has adjustable con-
tacts and can be used with your CW transmitter
after you receive your ham license. (Courtesy
of MFJ Enterprises, Inc., Box 494, Mississippi State,
MS 39762; Telephone: (601) 323-5869; Web site:
http//www.mfjenterprises.com.)
F I G U R E 2 . 4
64 CHAPTER TWO
operation. The hand key should be mounted on a wood or plastic
base of approximately 4   6 in (10   15 cm) to provide solid, stable
operation.
The source of code practice signals may be cassette tapes, phono-
graph records, a computer program for generating practice code on a
PC or other home computer, or an HF-band amateur radio receiver for
on-the-air reception of CW signals. One recommended approach
for individual practice sessions is to obtain a small, inexpensive cas-
sette-tape record/playback unit and one or more Technician code
training tapes. The cassette tape approach offers the advantages of a
stable, uniform source of code-practice signals at specified transmis-
sion rates; a capability for recording and playback of the beginner’s
hand-sent code signals; and if an HF-band receiver is available, an
ability to record on-the-air code signals for later playback. Also, the
cassette recorder may be taken to code and theory classes to record
Schematic diagram for code practice oscillator circuit using the Signetics NE555 IC
Timer.
On-off
switch
9 - volt
battery
S1
C1
0.1 F

R1
2200
Tone
control R2
100K
C2
0.02 F

4 8
7
3
2
6
1
U1
NE555
C3
R3
10K
Speaker
3–8 ohms
25 F
25 Vdc
LS1
To hand
key
J1
1 2 3 4
8 7 6 5
U1
Top view
Notes
1. C1, C2 — Disc ceramic, 25 Vdc rating
2. C3 — Electrolytic, 25 Vdc rating
3. J1 — Jack for hand key
4. LS1—3 to 8-ohm PM speaker
approximately 3-inch diameter
5. R1— 1/4 or 1/2 watt carbon resistor
6. R2, R3— volume control potentiometers
7. U1 may be installed on printed circuit
card or IC socket adapter (Radio Shack
276-024 or equivalent)
F I G U R E 2 . 5
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 65
code-practice sessions and discussions of radio theory and FCC rules
and regulations. Some Morse code training tape cassettes are shown
in Fig. 2.6.
W1AW, the ARRL amateur station in Newington, Connecticut,
transmits daily code-practice sessions on a scheduled basis. Approxi-
mate frequencies of transmission are 1.818, 3.5815, 7.0475, 14.0475,
18.0975, 21.0675, 28.0675, 50.0675, and 147.555 MHz. Slow code
practice sessions of about 5–15 WPM are scheduled at specific times
during the day to late evening hours, seven days a week. On alternat-
ing hours, fast code sessions of about 10–35 WPM are transmitted, also
on a seven-day basis. However, if variations to this schedule are
observed, you can contact the ARRL for the exact schedule. Monthly
schedules for W1AW code transmissions are given in QST, the ARRL
magazine devoted entirely to amateur radio.
BITE-SIZE CODE LESSONS
Most producers of code training tapes or
records recognize that it is almost impossi-
ble for the beginner to memorize the Inter-
national Morse code all at once. They
divide the code set into “bite-size” lessons
for about four or five characters each. Nor-
mally, the groups of characters are
arranged to contain similar characters,
such as those with all dits or dahs, and
then progress into the groups of characters
containing combinations of dits and dahs.
A typical series of bite-size code lessons is
given in Table 2.4. You may elect to use
this set of lessons if your code training
tapes (or records) do not contain such an
approach.
HAND COPY OF CODE SIGNALS
The best approach for fast, efficient copy
of code is by longhand writing or using a
typewriter. Although hand printing of
code messages looks more attractive and Morse code training tape cassettes for learning the
Morse code.
F I G U R E 2 . 6
66 CHAPTER TWO
is used by many CW operators, it is too
slow for most individuals at the higher
speeds of about 20 WPM and above. Thus,
developing a good habit of copying code
signals as a Technician will help you
when you progress to the higher-class
licenses.
MISSED CHARACTERS
One of the most annoying bad habits
developed by the beginner in copying
code signals is that of being stuck on
missed characters. Sometimes the brain
will simply refuse to recognize a particu-
lar character. Other factors, such as an
unexpected noise burst or fatigue from
practicing too long, will cause a person to
lose the power of concentration and there-
fore miss characters. It is a natural ten-
dency to stop and try to remember what
that particular character was. However,
stopping for one character means missing
the next two, three, or four.
The best approach is to simply ignore
the missed character and concentrate on
the following characters. This will require
an extra effort on your part. One way to
develop this habit is to write in a dash for
the missed character. This helps you to pro-
ceed to the next character and “turn loose”
of the one you missed.
ALWAYS INCREASE CODE SPEED DURING PRACTICE
You should never remain fixed on a code speed that can be copied
comfortably and accurately. For example, when you can copy 5 WPM
with some 95 to 100 percent accuracy, it is time to move up to a higher
code speed of about 7–8 WPM. This forces your mind to adapt and
become proficient at the higher speed.
TABLE 2.4 Recommended bite-size lessons
for learning the International Morse code.
Lesson number Character set
1 E, I, S, H
2 T, M, O, R
3 A, W, J, K
4 U, V, F, L
5 N, D, B, G
6 C, Y, Q, X
7 P, Z
8 Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
9 Numbers 6, 7, 8, 9, 0
10 Punctuation Symbols:
Period (.), Comma (,)
Question Mark (?)
Slant Bar (/), Error
11 Special Symbols:
Wait (AS), Pause (T),
End of Message (AR),
End of Work (VA),
Invitation To Transmit (K)
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 67
DON’T IGNORE SENDING PRACTICE
Many beginners make the mistake of neglecting sending practice while
concentrating on receiving practice. The FCC requires proficiency in
both sending and receiving code signals. If available, a cassette tape
recorder can be used to record the sending “fist” for subsequent analy-
sis and improvement. Remember also, the first contact on the Novice
frequencies may be disappointing if you cannot send an intelligent
code message.
Proper sending by a hand key requires a comfortable linkage
between the operator and the key. The spring tension and contact
spacing should be adjusted to suit the individual’s preference. While
operating, the arm should be positioned to rest on a flat surface and the
key should be loosely grasped by the thumb, forefinger, and index fin-
ger. Minimum fatigue and more uniform operating will result.
The FCC Written Examinations
The written examination for the Technician Class license, Element 2,
contains 35 questions covering rules and regulations, elementary radio
theory, and operating procedures. You must have a passing score of 26
correct answers to achieve the Technician Class license.
The VEC question pool
Appendix A presents the VEC question pool for the Technician Class
Element 2 license examinations. The question pool covers 10 specific
categories pertinent to the licensing and operation of amateur radio
stations. There are some 384 questions in the pool. Each question is a
multiple-choice type with one correct and three incorrect answers.
Table 2.5 shows the subject areas and number of questions covered by
the Technician Class license examinations.
Your Technician exam questions will be taken from this question
pool, verbatim. Just think about this for a minute—you have a chance
to review and learn every possible question on your Technician Class
license written examination.
Some helpful suggestions for successfully passing the Novice or
Technician written exam are in order. Most people are apprehensive
about taking tests, but knowing some of the pitfalls and reasons for
failing will help you to get through with flying colors.
68 CHAPTER TWO
BE PREPARED
Lack of preparation and study is the primary reason for failing amateur
license examinations. Since the Technician Class examination is the
easiest of all amateur examinations, many beginners do not devote suf-
ficient effort to study and preparation. Being prepared is more than
half of the battle—it gives you a high degree of confidence when it is
time to take the test.
Develop good study habits and a regular schedule for mastering all
of the material anticipated in the exam. A typical schedule may
involve one or two hours of study in a quiet room each day for about
two or three weeks. The actual time required for each individual will
vary, and each person must pace his or her study efforts accordingly.
The important thing to remember is that sufficient time must be
devoted to studying all of the required areas. For example, it is a cer-
tainty that the FCC will stress the rules and regulations on all exami-
TABLE 2.5 Technician Class Element 2 Written Examination Structure
Number of
Subelement Total questions on
Topic number questions examination
Commission rules T1 102 9
Operating procedures T2 55 5
Radio wave propagation T3 33 3
Amateur radio practices T4 44 4
Electrical principles T5 33 3
Circuit components T6 22 2
Practical circuits T7 22 2
Signals and emissions T8 20 2
Antennas and feed lines T9 22 2
RF safety fundamentals
and definitions T0 31 3
Totals 384 35
HOW TO PREPARE FOR THE FCC TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION 69
nations. As you can see from Table 2.5, the Technician Class examina-
tion contains nine questions on FCC Rules and five questions on oper-
ating procedures. Again, remember that in Appendix A you have
access to the exact questions that will be used.
One suggested study technique used by many beginners in suc-
cessfully preparing for the Technician examination is to write each
question on one side of an index card and the correct answer on the
reverse side. The process of writing down the information on the cards
results in considerable retention of this material. Then, by constant
review, you can begin to separate the cards into two piles—known and
unknown. After a while, the stack of cards containing unknown
answers will diminish to zero. Oh yes, be sure to go through the entire
stack of cards the night before the examination for a final review.
Scheduling the examination
Be sure to check with the local volunteer examiner (VE) for testing
requirements and to register for the examination at a time convenient
to both parties. You may need to obtain, fill out, and send a form to the
VE for preregistration. If you do not know where the nearest volunteer
examiner team is in your area, contact the local amateur radio club
or the ARRL, Educational Activities Department, 225 Main Street,
Newington, CT 06111.
Taking the examination
Plan to arrive early at the examination point. This will ensure no inter-
ruption of examinations in progress and will help you locate a com-
fortable place to sit. At a minimum, you will need to bring the
following to the exam:
1. Any current amateur radio license and/or certificate of successful
completion of examination.
2. Two documents for identification purposes. This may include a
current amateur radio license, a photo ID such as a driver’s license,
or a birth certificate.
3. Several sharpened No. 2 pencils, an eraser, and two pens (black
or blue ink). If a pocket calculator is available, bring it along for
possible mathematical calculations. However, if a programmable
70 CHAPTER TWO
calculator is used, be sure it is cleared of all instructions and con-
stants. Ask the VE for blank paper to write out such items as cal-
culations and formulas.
4. Finally, don’t forget to bring the testing fee (about $6–7). Check
with your VE on this point.
Carefully read the FCC instructions on the examination. Fill out all
requested information, including signatures, before proceeding. Check
the exam to ensure that all pages are included. If some are missing,
report this to the VE immediately. Check the question numbers.
Read each question thoroughly before attempting to answer it.
Remember, a multiple-choice exam requires a careful screening of all
answers to decide on the most correct one. If the question cannot be
answered correctly after the first deliberation, move on to the next one.
In this manner, the easy questions can be answered and you can return
to the more difficult ones for additional study. In many instances, this
delay in tackling the tough questions gives the mind a chance to recall
the correct answer. Also, some subsequent questions may relate to the
one you are having trouble with. Most volunteer examiners will allow
any reasonable length of time for completing the exam.
At the end of the test, carefully check to ensure that all questions
have been answered. Go back over each answer to be 100 percent sure
that the most correct answer has been given. Some test-takers fail
because of carelessness in answering questions, though they may
know the required material. When this final check is finished, return
the exam to the VE.
If by some chance you fail the examination, chalk this up to expe-
rience and try again. The FCC allows you to retake the test at any time
convenient to the VE. Good luck!
The ability to transmit and receive radio waves is a fascinating sub-
ject. In this chapter we will take a close look at some of the funda-
mentals of radio communication. Learning these principles will help
you to pass the Technician Class license examination and to under-
stand how amateur radio signals are propagated for long distances.
Definitions
Sky-wave propagation A type of radio-wave propagation in which
radio waves traveling upward are bent or refracted by the ionosphere
back to the earth. This is one of the major means of amateur communi-
cation in the high-frequency spectrum. Otherwise, these radio waves
would be propagated into outer space and lost. Sky-wave propagation
provides a capability for long-range or DX communications using one
or more “hops” in which the radio waves are reflected back to the earth.
Ground-wave propagation Another form of propagation in which
the ground or surface wave travels along the surface of the ground or
water. This mode of propagation is important at the low and medium
frequencies. Most commercial AM broadcast stations use ground-wave
propagation during daylight hours for local urban and suburban cov-
erage. However, beginning at about 3 MHz, ground-wave propagation
at distances greater than 100 miles (or about 160 kilometers) becomes
impractical.
Radio Communications Theory
3
71
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
72 CHAPTER THREE
Refraction of radio waves Radio waves, like light waves, are
refracted or bent when they pass from one medium to another medium
with a different density. Since radio waves traveling upward experi-
ence less atmospheric density, they may be curved or bent. This is
related to sky-wave propagation.
Sunspot cycle The sun exhibits a periodic 11-year cycle of
increasing and decreasing sunspots which affect radio communica-
tions on earth. Scientists have recorded the number of sunspots
appearing on the surface of the sun for the past 300 years and have
determined that the number of sunspots reaches a maximum about
every 11 years. Also, the number of sunspots will vary during each
maximum and minimum cycle. The maximums may range from about
60 to over 200 while minimums may drop to almost zero.
During maximum sunspot activity, excellent amateur communica-
tions in the bands up to and including the 10-meter band are possible.
However, during minimum sunspot activity, long-range communica-
tion is almost nil in the 15- and 10-meter bands. Also, 20-meter opera-
tion is restricted primarily to daylight operation.
Skip distance The skip distance is associated with sky-wave prop-
agation for the most part. It is defined as the distance between the trans-
mitter location and the point that the skywave returns to earth after
striking the ionosphere. Except for the limited area subject to ground-
wave reception, the skip distance or zone does not allow for communi-
cations because no radio waves are reflected or bent into this zone.
Wavelength The wavelength of a radio-frequency signal is defined
as the length in meters of that signal. More specifically, it is the length
of one complete cycle of the radio wave. Thus, a 10-meter signal or
wave is approximately 10 meters in length (or about 32.8 feet). For
example, a quarter-wave vertical antenna for 10 meters would be
approximately 2.5 meters (or about 8.2 feet) of vertical distance.
Frequency Frequency is defined as the number of complete
cycles per second that a radio signal exhibits in passing from a value
of maximum intensity, through zero intensity, and back to the original
value of intensity. Frequency is measured in hertz (or simply Hz),
which is directly equivalent to cycles per second; that is, 1 Hz equals
1 cycle per second.
Frequency is related to wavelength and may be used interchange-
ably to describe the wave motion of a radio wave. Frequency can be
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 73
converted to wavelength in meters by dividing the frequency in hertz
into 300,000,000. For example, 7150 kHz (which is 7,150,000 Hz) cor-
responds to a wavelength of 41.96 meters.
Ionosphere The ionosphere consists of layers of ionized air at
heights above the surface of the earth ranging from about 7 to 250 miles
(or about 11 to 402 kilometers). This ionization of the rarefied air parti-
cles is caused by the ultraviolet radiation from the sun. The heights of
these layers vary from daylight to darkness, depending on the position
of the sun with respect to the surface of the earth. A more detailed
description of the ionosphere will be given later in this chapter.
The Radio Circuit—Transmitter to Receiver
Radio is defined as the transmission and reception of communications
signals through space by means of electromagnetic waves. These com-
munications signals contain intelligence conveyed by such forms as
code, voice, television images, teleprinter, and computer-to-computer
operation in digital form. Noncommunications electronics systems
that use electromagnetic radiation include radar, navigation aids, and
identification devices.
Figure 3.1 illustrates a generalized model of a radio communica-
tions system. The source of intelligence can be code being generated
by a telegraph key or a microphone picking up the sounds of human
speech. This intelligence, when applied to the modulator, varies the
transmitter’s radio-frequency (RF) output energy by the modulation
method being used. In the case of code transmissions, the key can be
used to switch on and off the carrier frequency of the transmitter,
resulting in a series of dits and dahs containing the required informa-
tion. Voice modulation schemes can employ amplitude or frequency
modulation.
The RF power output levels from transmitters can range from a few
watts to hundreds or thousands of watts. This RF energy is converted
to electromagnetic or radio waves by the transmitting antenna. With
proper matching between the transmitter, transmission line, and the
antenna, most of the RF output of the transmitter will be used to gen-
erate radio waves.
In most communications systems, particularly in the high-fre-
quency (HF) spectrum, the propagation path loss or attenuation is
74 CHAPTER THREE
tremendous. Sky-wave propagation can reduce the transmitted signal
power level from many watts to micromicrowatts at the receiving
antenna. The radio receiver must have sufficient sensitivity to detect
and amplify these weak signals for demodulation and conversion to
the required output such as audio speech or code signals.
Radio communications depend on many factors for reliable perfor-
mance. Some of these factors are the RF power output levels, the
antenna directivity and gain characteristics, the radio frequencies
being used and the related propagation characteristics at these fre-
quencies, and the receiver performance. An ever-increasing number of
transmitters in the already crowded spectrum, as well as interference
from nonintentional emitters, also adds to the problems of achieving
reliable radio communications. These factors are explored in detail
beginning in this chapter.
The Electromagnetic Spectrum
The electromagnetic spectrum, as defined by modern science, ranges
from extremely long radio waves to ultrashort cosmic rays. Between
Generalized model of a communications system.
Source of
intelligence Modulator Demodulator Reproduced
intelligence
Radio
frequency
transmitter
Radio
frequency
receiver
Interference
Propagation path
Transmitting
antenna
Transmission
line
Transmission
line
Receiving
antenna
F I G U R E 3 . 1
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 75
these two extremes lie the short radio waves, microwaves, infrared
radiation, visible light, ultraviolet rays, X-rays, and gamma radiation.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the electromagnetic spectrum and the breakout of
the RF and light-wave portions of the spectrum.
The electromagnetic spectrum.
Very Low Frequencies
(VLF)
Low Frequencies
(LF)
Meduim Frequencies
(MF)
High Frequencies
(HF)
Very High Frequencies
(VHF)
Ultra High Frequencies
(UHF)
Super High Frequencies
(SHF)
Extremely High Frequencies
(EHF)
3
kHz
30
kHz
300
kHz
3
MHz
30
MHz
300
MHz
3
GHz
30
GHz
300
GHz
100,000 Meters
1000 Meters
10 Meters
10 CM
0.1 CM
0.7 Microns
0.4 Microns
3 104
Microns
3 106
Microns
3 109
Microns
Radio frequency spectrum
Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Indigo Violet
0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4
Visible light-wavelength
in microns
Radio waves Infrared Visible
light
Cosmic
rays
Gamma
rays
X-rays
rays
Ultra
violet
Total spectrum in wavelength
Key
CM = Centimeter
GHz = Gigihertz
kHz = Kilohertz
MHz = Megahertz
Micron = 0.000001 Meter or 1 106 Meters.
F I G U R E 3 . 2
76 CHAPTER THREE
Frequency and wavelength
Frequency and wavelength are related
properties or characteristics that describe
an alternating quantity such as an electro-
magnetic wave of an alternating current
(ac) signal. Figure 3.3 shows a graphical
representation of sine-wave cycles that are
characteristic of most ac signals and elec-
tromagnetic waves. One complete cycle
consists of the wave starting at a reference point such as zero ampli-
tude, traveling through a positive and negative value, and returning to
the original reference value, zero in this example.
Frequency is defined as the number of complete cycles generated
in one second and is expressed in hertz (or simply Hz), which equals
cycles per second. Thus 60 Hz, the frequency of ac electrical power
used in most homes and manufacturing plants, consists of 60 complete
cycles of alternating current each second. Figure 3.4 illustrates the 60-
Hz power-line frequency.
Radio-frequency signals and electromagnetic waves are measured
in terms of thousands, millions, and billions of hertz. For convenience
in expressing such large numbers, the following terms and their abbre-
viations were developed:
Kilohertz (kHz)  1000 Hz (or 1000 cycles per second)
Megahertz (MHz)  1,000,000 Hz (or 1000 kHz)
Gigahertz (GHz)  1,000,000,000 Hz (or 1000 MHz)
Sine waves of ac signals and electromagnetic waves.
Maximum positive level
Zero level
Maximum negative level
One complete
cycle One complete
cycle
F I G U R E 3 . 3
Example of 60-Hz power line frequency.
1 2 3 4 5 60
Cycle no.
Positive
level
Zero level
Negative
level 1 Second
F I G U R E 3 . 4
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 77
Wavelength is defined as the physical length of one complete cycle
of an electromagnetic wave traveling in free space. For example, a 10-
meter radio wave in free space exhibits a physical length of 10 meters
(or about 32.8 feet) for each complete cycle of the wave.
Because electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light
(300,000,000 meters per second) in free space, the frequency of the
wave in complete cycles per second (or Hz) can be determined by
dividing 300,000,000 by the wavelength in meters. Also, if the fre-
quency of a wave is known, the wavelength can be determined by
dividing 300,000,000 by the frequency in hertz. These relationships or
equations can be expressed as follows:
A. To find frequency of a radio wave when wavelength is known:
f  (Eq. 3.1)
where
f is the frequency in Hz,
is the wavelength in meters.
B. To find the wavelength when frequency is known:
 (Eq. 3.2)
Two examples are given to show these relationships. Remember,
always convert frequency in kilohertz or megahertz to hertz or Equa-
tion 3.2 will not give the correct wavelength.
Example 1 Find the wavelength of an electromagnetic wave generated by
an amateur transmitter operating at 7.255 MHz.
Solution Step A. 7.255 MHz is converted to 7,255,000 Hz
(7.255   1,000,000 equals 7,255,000)
Step B. By using Equation 3.2,
 41.35 meters (Answer)
Example 2 Find the frequency of a radio signal being received if the
wavelength is 20.9 meters.
Solution Step A. Using Equation 3.1
300,000,000
7,255,000
300,000,000
f meters
300,000,000
Hz
78 CHAPTER THREE
f   14,354,000 Hz
Step B. Convert frequency in hertz to megahertz:
 14.354000 MHz
Step C. Round off to the nearest kilohertz: 14.354 MHz (Answer)
This is the first occasion in this book to use a little mathematics, and
some comments may be in order to help you become more proficient in
the use of “math” in amateur radio computations. The need for mathe-
matical computations in the written examinations for the Technician
Class license is extremely limited. However, examinations for the
higher class licenses will require more use of mathematical computa-
tions. We recommend that you become familiar with the basic equa-
tions used in amateur radio. This will help you in constructing
antennas for specific operating frequencies, the design of “home-brew”
equipment, and other aspects of amateur radio. Another suggestion is
to obtain a “scientific” style pocket calculator. While most simple
pocket calculators will help with the basic operations of addition, sub-
traction, multiplication, and division, the more serious amateur will
want to make calculations involving squares, square roots, logarithms,
and trigonometric functions. Don’t let these last math expressions
alarm you: much information concerning them can be learned simply
by following the instructions furnished with each calculator.
The radio frequency spectrum
Radio frequencies are defined as ranging from about 10,000 Hz (10
kHz) to 300,000,000,000 Hz (300 GHz), with the upper limit approach-
ing infrared and visible-light radiation. The radio spectrum is divided
into designated bands, which exhibit individual characteristics such
as propagation and methods of generation and detection. Table 3.1
lists these bands and their respective frequency ranges.
No amateur communications are permitted in the VLF band (3 to 30
kHz). Operation in this band is limited primarily to radio navigation
aids, time-frequency standard stations, and military, maritime, and
aeronautical communications. Limited, mostly experimental, amateur
communications is permitted in the 160–190 kHz portion of the LF
14,354,000
1,000,000
300,000,000
20.9
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 79
band (30 to 300 kHz). The bulk of amateur radio communications
starts in the 1800–2000 kHz portion of the MF band and extends
through the EHF band.
Each band of amateur frequencies offers a distinct challenge in
terms of radio propagation characteristics and types of equipment to
be used. Sky-wave propagation, useful in the HF band for long-range
communications, is almost nonexistent in the VHF frequencies and
above. Components and construction techniques used in equipment
for MF or HF frequencies are not always applicable for VHF and UHF
frequencies. For example, a capacitor may act as a capacitor at HF fre-
quencies but may exhibit qualities of inductance at VHF or UHF fre-
quencies. Many transistors will simply not operate at VHF or UHF
frequencies.
TABLE 3.1 Band Designations with Frequency and Wavelength for the
Radio-Frequency Spectrum
Band designation Frequency range Wavelength in free space
VLF—very low 3 to 30 kilohertz 100,000 to 10,000 meters
frequencies
LF—low 30 to 300 kilohertz 10,000 to 1000 meters
frequencies
MF—medium 300 to 3000 kilohertz 1000 to 100 meters
frequencies
HF—high 3 to 30 megahertz 100 to 10 meters
frequencies
VHF—very high 30 to 300 megahertz 10 to 1 meters
frequencies
UHF—ultra high 300 to 3000 megahertz 1 to 0.1 meters
frequencies
SHF—super high 3 to 30 gigahertz 10 to 1 centimeters
frequencies
EHF—extremely high 30 to 300 gigahertz 1 to 0.1 centimeters
frequencies
80 CHAPTER THREE
Wave propagation
Electromagnetic or radio waves are repro-
duced when radio-frequency energy (such
as generated by a radio transmitter) is fed
into an antenna. These radio waves, con-
sisting of alternating electric and magnetic
fields at right angles to each other, radiate
out from the antenna at approximately the
speed of light. For an omnidirectional
antenna, the radiated wave spreads out
equally as an increasing sphere. As the
wave proceeds further away from the
antenna, a small section of the surface of
the sphere, or wavefront, will appear to be
flat. This flattened surface, usually desig-
nated as a plane wave, contains the elec-
tric and magnetic fields at right angles to
each other and in phase. A receiving
antenna at distances of a few miles (about
4 to 5 kilometers) will “see” the radio
energy as plane waves. Figure 3.5A illus-
trates the plane waves emanating from the
transmitting antenna. In this example, the
waves are said to be vertically polarized.
The intensity and direction of the elec-
tric and magnetic fields vary at a rate equal
to the original radio frequency. The wave-
length of these waves is the distance that
the wave travels in one complete cycle.
Figure 3.5B shows the relationship of the electric and magnetic fields
as the wave travels in free space.
Types of Propagation
Electromagnetic or radio waves are transmitted from one point to
another via one or more of the following propagation paths: ground
waves, sky waves, direct waves, and reflected waves. Amateur radio
communications on the HF frequency bands rely primarily on sky-
Propagation of radio waves in free space. (A) Cross
section of the plane wavefront. (B) Varying electric
and magnetic field intensities.
(A)
(B)
X axis
Y axisElectric field
in vertical plane
Z axis
Magnetic field
in horizontal plane
B
A
Point source
of radiation
Y axis
Vertical
electric field
Z axis
Horizontal
magnetic field X axis
F I G U R E 3 . 5
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 81
and ground-wave propagation. Communications on VHF and higher
band frequencies use mostly direct- or reflected-wave propagation.
Let’s examine each of these modes of propagation and see how they
apply to amateur radio operation, particularly in the HF bands.
Ground radio waves from the transmitting antenna travel along the
surface of the earth. In the HF bands and above, the radio waves are
attenuated by the earth’s surface and rarely extend beyond 20 to 30
miles (or about 30 to 50 kilometers). Thus amateur radio communica-
tions in the HF bands and above cannot rely on ground-wave propaga-
tion over long distances.
Virtually all long-range amateur radio communications from 80 to 10
meters are accomplished by sky-wave propagation. The HF radio waves
radiated into space from the transmitting antenna, are refracted from the
ionosphere back to the earth’s surface. Figure 3.6 illustrates ground-
wave and sky-wave propagation at the HF frequencies. There is a weak
signal area between the point of transmission and the point of return to
earth for the refracted waves: this area is referred to as the skip zone or
skip distance. Signal reception in the skip zone is virtually impossible,
Ground- and sky-wave propagation of HF frequencies.
Skip distance
Ground wave
Transmitting
antenna
Ionosphere
Sky wave
F I G U R E 3 . 6
82 CHAPTER THREE
particularly in the HF bands above 40-meters. Be sure you are familiar
with ground- and sky-wave propagation because the FCC Technician
Class examinations will include questions on these subjects.
Beginning with the VHF and UHF frequencies, direct and reflected
waves are the major modes of propagation. Figure 3.7 shows an exam-
ple of a particular transmission with both direct and reflected waves.
Most of the reliable communications at these frequencies are often
referred to as line-of-sight propagation of the direct wave. This simply
means that the transmitting antenna must be able to “see” the receiv-
ing antenna with no intervening obstructions. Some forms of long-
range propagation modes are experienced at these higher frequencies.
Occasional skip distances of up to 2500 miles (about 4000 kilometers)
or more are encountered in the amateur bands at VHF and UHF fre-
quencies due to abnormal atmospheric conditions.
The Effects of the Ionosphere on Radio
Communications
The ionosphere consists of changing layers of ionized air particles in
the rarefied regions of the atmosphere beginning about 40 to 50 miles
Direct and reflected wave propagation.
Direct wave
Reflected wave
F I G U R E 3 . 7
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 83
(50 to 80 kilometers) above the earth. The ionosphere differs from other
regions of rarefied air in that it contains large numbers of free ions
(charged particles) and electrons. The creation of these layers of
charged particles and electrons is attributed to the intense radiation of
the sun. The layers of the ionosphere extend up to about 250 miles (400
kilometers), depending on the intensity of the radiation of the sun.
The rotation of the earth on its axis, the orbital journey of the earth
around the sun, and varying sunspot activity on the surface of the sun
will result in a constant changing of the layers of charged particles in
the ionosphere. It is the nature of the ionosphere that affects the qual-
ity and distance of radio communications.
Ionospheric layers
Up to four distinct layers of ionized or charged particles can be present
in the ionosphere at any one time. Each layer consists of varying den-
sities of charged particles ranging from an intense density in the inner
region to very little density at the outer regions. Above 250 miles (400
kilometers), the number of air particles in the atmosphere is too small
to permit the formation of any sizable concentration of charged parti-
cles that would affect radio communications. At altitudes below 40
miles (64 kilometers), the intensity of the radiation of the sun is
reduced, or attenuated, by the ionosphere and little potential remains
to create more charged particles.
During daylight hours, the radiation of the sun produces four
ionospheric layers: the D layer ranging from about 40 to 50 miles (64 to
80 kilometers); the E layer from about 50 to 90 miles (80 to 145 kilo-
meters); the F1 layer at about 140 miles (225 kilometers); and the F2
layer at about 200 miles (320 kilometers). The ionization intensity of
these layers rises to a maximum level about midday, local time.
At sunset, a transition of the ionospheric layers begins to take place.
The D layer disappears, the F1 and F2 layers combine into a single
layer, and the ionization intensity of these two layers is reduced. Figure
3.8 illustrates both the day and night composition of the ionosphere.
Sunspots affect the ionosphere
The presence of sunspots on the surface of the sun has a marked influ-
ence on radio communications. Sunspots are dark areas on the surface
of the sun, sometimes appearing in groups covering areas of up to
84 CHAPTER THREE
100,000 miles (160,000 kilometers) in diameter. They appear to be
solar storms, resembling earth tornadoes. A sunspot can develop in a
matter of hours, persist for a few weeks, and then break up into a num-
ber of smaller spots. Associated with the sunspots are intense mag-
netic fields or disturbances.
Sunspots affect the intensity of the radiation of the sun, including
ultraviolet waves. During periods of high sunspot activity, the radia-
tion of the sun increases producing more intense ionization of the
atmosphere. At approximate 11-year intervals, the number of sunspots
builds up to a maximum ranging from about 60 to 200. During mini-
mum sunspot activity, the number of sunspots can decrease to zero for
short periods of time.
High sunspot activity
High sunspot activity results in more skywave propagation at the
higher HF frequencies. The highest usable frequency is normally
referred to as the maximum usable frequency (MUF). During this
period, the MUF will extend to the 10-meter band and beyond, pro-
viding reliable communications paths. The MUF is reduced to about
the 20-meter band during periods of minimum sunspot activity. Only
sporadic activity is available at 15 meters, and the 10-meter band is
essentially “dead” except for local activity.
Sunspot activity has been observed for some 250 years, with accu-
rate measurements being recorded in the last 150 years. The last two
Structure of the ionosphere during day and night. (A) Composition of the ionosphere
during daylight hours. (B) Composition of the ionosphere during nighttime hours.
F2
F1
E
D
200 Miles
140 Miles
90 Miles
50
Miles
175 Miles
90 Miles
F
E
A B
F I G U R E 3 . 8
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 85
periods of maximum sunspot activity, known as Sunspot Cycles 22
and 23, began in 1986 and 1999, respectively. Current sunspot activity
is available from time standard stations WWV at Ft. Collins, Colorado,
and WWVH at Kauai, Hawaii—both stations transmit continually on
frequencies of 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, 15.0, and 20 MHz. Most amateur receivers
will provide reception on 10 MHz to permit monitoring of WWV and
WWVH.
Propagation characteristics of the ionosphere
During daylight hours, sky-wave energy of the 160- and 80-meter ama-
teur bands is almost completely absorbed by the D layer. Only high-
angle radiation can penetrate the D layer and be reflected back to earth
by the E layer. This restricts operation on these bands to about 150 to
250 miles (240 to 400 kilometers). The remaining HF amateur bands
experience very little D-layer absorption.
The E layer is probably the best region in the ionosphere for reli-
able sky-wave propagation. Distances of up to about 1200 miles
(2000 kilometers) in one-hop transmissions are common for frequen-
cies up to about 20 MHz. Sporadic E ionization, or occasional erratic
regions of E-layer ionization, permits propagation of radio waves
with frequencies extending well into the VHF band. Sometimes
referred to as “short skip,” this phenomenon is most prevalent in the
northern hemisphere during summer months and in the southern
hemisphere during winter months. Transmission paths range from
about 4000 to 1300 miles (650 to 2100 kilometers) for single-hop
transmissions and up to 2500 miles (400 kilometers) or more for mul-
tihop paths.
Most HF waves penetrating the E layer also pass through the F1
layer and are reflected by the F2 layer, the outermost region of the
ionosphere. The F2 layer is the principal reflecting region for long-
distance HF communications, providing for international or world-
wide transmission paths. Frequencies involved in F2 transmission
range from about 20 MHz to as high as 70 MHz during high sunspot
activity. At this time, excellent band openings on 10 and 6 meters are
available for multihop paths of up to 12,000 miles (20,000 kilome-
ters) or more. However, this capability decreases with diminishing
sunspot activity and becomes almost nonexistent during minimum
activity.
86 CHAPTER THREE
TABLE 3.2 Propagation Characteristics of Amateur Bands
Amateur bands Propagation characteristics
160 meters  Ground waves to about 25 miles
(1.8–2.0 MHz)  Day sky waves to about 200 miles
 Night sky waves to about 2500 miles
80 meters  Ground waves to about 20 miles
(3.5–4.0 MHz)  Day sky waves to about 250 miles
 Night sky waves to about 2500 miles
40 meters  Ground wave to about 20 miles
(7.0–7.3 MHz)  Day sky waves to about 750 miles
 Night sky waves to about 10,000 miles
20 meters  Ground waves to about 20 miles
(14.0–14.35 MHz)  Day sky waves with worldwide communications extending from
dawn to dusk
 Excellent night sky waves during high sunspot activity
 Virtually no sky waves during minimum sunspot activity
15 meters  Ground waves to about 20 miles
(21.0–21.45 MHz)  Worldwide day and night sky waves during high sunspot activity
 No night sky waves and only occasional day sky waves during mini-
mum sunspot activity
10 meters  Ground waves to about 20 miles
(28.0–29.7 MHz)  Worldwide sky waves in daytime and early evening hours during
high sunspot activity
 Very little day sky waves and virtually no night sky waves during
minimum sunspot activity.
VHF frequencies and above  No ground wave propagation in sense of MF and HF ground waves.
(Beginning with 50–54 MHz) Direct and reflected waves describe line-of-sight radiation for these
frequencies.
 Only 6-meter band exhibits fairly constant propagation at distances
of about 75 to 100 miles. Some ionospheric conditions permit prop-
agation paths up to 2500 miles.
 Frequencies at 144 MHz and above exhibit primarily line-of-sight
communications with little ionospheric effects on this propagation.
However, unusual propagation modes, such as ducting, will allow
limited long-range communications.
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS THEORY 87
Nighttime propagation conditions
The disappearance of the D layer after sunset allows the 160- and 80-
meter amateur band waves to pass unobstructed to the E and F layers.
Sky-wave propagation at these bands increases to distances of about
2500 miles (4000 kilometers) by F-layer reflections.
The E layer loses most of its ionization properties after sunset and
has very little effect on HF propagation. However, occasional sporadic-
E regions may be present and contribute to propagation paths well into
the VHF frequencies.
Shortly after sunset, the F1 and F2 layers combine into a single
layer with slowly decreasing ionization levels. This results in a lower-
ing of the MUF to the 40-meter band for amateur communications.
Table 3.2 lists the primary modes of propagation in the amateur
bands. Space does not permit a complete description of all modes of
propagation involved in radio communications. Also, for purposes of
brevity, the distances are given in miles. To convert to meters, multi-
ply the distance in miles by 1.61.
The Yaesu FT-990 All Mode HF Transceiver. This superb amateur HF radio reflects the
latest state-of-the-art in electronics technology. The FT-990 features all mode SSB,
AM, CW, FSK operation; all amateur bands from 160 meters to 10 meters with 90
memories that store frequency, mode, and bandwidth for dual VFOs; receiver coverage
from 100 kHz to 30 MHz, adjustable transmitter power output up to 100 watts (25
watts for AM); built-in high speed antenna tuner with 39 memories; and other
advanced capabilities. (Courtesy of Yaesu USA, 17210 Edwards Road, Cerritos, CA 90701,
Telephone: (301) 404-2700)
F I G U R E 3 . 9
This page intentionally left blank.
The study of electricity and magnetism provides a foundation for
almost every aspect of radio communications. The basic principles
of electrical current flow are used to describe the action of resistors,
capacitors, and inductors in ac and dc circuits. The concepts of elec-
tromagnetism, for example, can be used to explain the operation of
power-line, voice, or radio-frequency transformers.
The material in this chapter is designed to help you learn enough
basic theory and practical knowledge for the FCC Technician Class
examinations and subsequent operation of your Technician amateur
station. You will also find that this theory and practical information
will be helpful in understanding the operation of vacuum tubes, tran-
sistors, amplifiers, and other radio circuits. Finally, mastering the
material in this and subsequent chapters will lay the foundation for
your study of more advanced amateur license examinations.
Definitions
Alternating current Alternating current (ac) is a flow of current
that alternates or reverses its direction of flow on a periodic basis. The
ac power used in most homes in the United States exhibits a complete
reversal of current flow 60 times per second. Thus, the frequency of
Principles of
Electricity and Magnetism
4
89
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
90 CHAPTER FOUR
this ac power can be described as 60 cycles per second or 60 hertz
(Hz).The unit of current is the ampere.
Capacitance Capacitance is defined as the ability to store electri-
cal energy by means of an electrical field. In a physical sense, a capac-
itor consists of two conductors (such as two parallel metal plates)
separated by an insulator known as a dielectric. The dielectric can be
waxed paper, ceramic, air, or other insulating material. The unit of
capacitance is the farad.
Direct current Direct current (dc) can be described as a flow of
current in one direction only. For example, a battery forces current to
flow in an electrical circuit in one direction only.
Electrical power Expressed in units of watts (W), electrical power
is the rate at which electricity is performing work. Electrical power
can be converted to heat when a current flows in a resistor or to phys-
ical motion when current flows in an electric motor.
Electromotive force Electromotive force (emf) can be described as
a difference in potential, or voltage, which forces the flow of current in
a conductor. It is analogous to pressure in a water pipe that forces water
to flow through the pipe. The unit of electromotive force is the volt.
Frequency Frequency is used to describe the number of alternat-
ing cycles of an ac current flow in one second, or the number of com-
plete wave cycles per second of an electromagnetic wave. The basic
unit of frequency is the cycle per second, usually referred to as a hertz.
Related terms are:
1 Kilohertz (kHz) = 1000 Hz.
1 Megahertz (MHz) = 1,000,000 Hz.
INDUCTANCE Inductance implies an ability to store electrical energy
by means of a magnetic field. Current passing through an inductor or
coil creates magnetic lines of force. The inductance of a coil can be
defined in terms of the number of magnetic lines of force generated by
a unit of current flowing in the coil. The unit of inductance is the
henry.
RESISTANCE Resistance is simply the opposition to the flow of
current. Resistance is measured in units of ohms.
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 91
Fundamentals of Electricity
The first recorded observation of electricity was made in ancient
Greece about 2600 years ago. Thales of Miletus discovered that when
amber was rubbed with a wool cloth, it would attract small bits of
straw. However, this discovery would go unnoticed until the sixteenth
century. William Gilbert, an English physicist, made a detailed study
of Thales’ observations and found that many substances such as hard
rubber and glass would exhibit this force of attraction. Because the
Greek word for amber is elektron, Gilbert proposed that this attractive
force be called electricity.
By the eighteenth century, scientists had discovered two types of
electrical charges, which were designated as positive and negative.
This led to the development of a fundamental law of electricity, the
law of charges. Simply stated, the law of charges governs the behavior
of particles of matter possessing electrical charge: Like Charges
Repel—Unlike Charges Attract.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the basic principles involved in the law of
charges. You will find this fundamental law of electricity useful in
describing the flow of electrical current in conductors, capacitors,
inductors, transistors, and other components.
0 0   
A B C
Experiment demonstrating the law of charges. (A) No electrical charge on either ball.
No force of attraction or repulsion is exerted. (B) Both sides possess a negative charge.
This causes a force of repulsion which tends to separate the balls. (C) Balls possessing
unlike charges are attracted to each other.
F I G U R E 4 . 1
92 CHAPTER FOUR
Atoms and matter
Near the end of the nineteenth century, most of the basic laws of elec-
tricity had been discovered and documented. The scientists involved
in this field knew the effects of electricity, but not the cause or origin.
The battery, motor, generator, electric lamp, telegraph, telephone, and
even the wireless had been invented before science could explain the
nature of electricity.
The atomic theory of matter, developed jointly by chemists and
physicists, brought about the first plausible explanation of electricity.
All matter can be described primarily in terms of elements that are
composed of varying numbers of electrons, protons, and neutrons—
the basic building blocks of nature. There are 104 different elements
known to date, ranging from the simple atoms of hydrogen and
helium to the more complex atoms of silicon, copper, and cali-
fornium. Figure 4.2 shows models of the hydrogen and helium atoms.
Unfortunately, there are still many unanswered questions and
incomplete explanations regarding the current theory for the atomic
structure of matter. Many other subatomic particles have been discov-
ered or postulated to account for certain inconsistencies observed to
date. The dual nature of the electron, acting alternately as a solid parti-
cle of matter and as a wave of energy cannot be explained. Fortunately
for the electronics field, the present theory of atomic structure provides
an adequate and reasonable explanation for the nature of electricity.

Electron
in orbit
Nucleus with one proton Two protons and two neutrons
Electron
in orbit
Electron
in orbit
Nucleus
Models of hydrogen and helium atoms.
F I G U R E 4 . 2
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 93
Negative and positive charges
Electrons are tiny particles of matter that possess a negative electric
charge, sometimes referred to as a “unit of electric charge.” Electrons
normally travel in specified orbits around the nucleus of an atom. Elec-
trons in the inner orbits are tightly bound to the atoms while electrons
in an outer orbit might be loosely held to the atom. Under the influence
of external energy such as heat, an outer orbit electron might escape
from the parent atom and become a “free electron.” This represents a
negative charge lost by the atom, making the atom positively charged.
Protons and neutrons are tiny particles contained within the nucleus
of the atom. Each proton possesses a positive electric charge, equal and
opposite to that of the electron. However, the proton has a mass about
1800 times the mass of the electron. The neutron, which has no electric
charge, has a mass approximately equal to the mass of the proton.
Electricity—the flow of electrons
When an atom loses an electron, the free electron becomes mobile and
acts as a moving negative charge. In a material such as copper, many
free electrons are created and are free to move in random directions
throughout the material. These electrons eventually collide with
atoms or other electrons, losing or gaining energy in the process. The
atom releasing an electron becomes a positive ion, which is not free to
move about in a solid material.
The movement of the free electrons, each with a negative charge,
does not affect the total electric charge on the material. We still have an
equal number of positive ions in the material that balances out the num-
ber of free electrons. In fact, a free electron colliding with a positive ion
can recombine to form a normal or neutral atom.
The type of material and its ambient temperature are the major fac-
tors that determine the number of free electrons present at any given
time. At normal room temperature, materials such as silver, copper, and
gold possess a large number of free electrons. For example, copper has
about 1.4 × 1024 free electrons per cubic inch (16.4 cubic centimeters) at
normal room temperature. (This extremely large number is equal to 14
followed by 23 zeros!) Figure 4.3A shows the random movement of free
electrons in a piece of copper wire.
The availability of large numbers of free electrons allows the flow of
negative charge within a material. When we connect the copper wire to
a battery as shown in Fig. 4.3B, this creates a potential difference or
94 CHAPTER FOUR
voltage across the wire. The negatively charged electrons are immedi-
ately attracted to the positive pole of the battery while the negative pole
repels the electrons. The flow of electrons through the copper wire con-
stitutes a current. In a practical sense, connecting a copper wire across
a battery would rapidly drain the battery.
These forces of attraction and repulsion can be thought of as electri-
cal pressure, similar to pressure in a water pipe that forces water
through the pipe. Current can be thought of as analogous to the amount
of water flowing in the pipe at any one time.
Units of voltage and current
The unit of potential difference or voltage is the volt. Sometimes volt-
age is referred to as electromotive force or emf. Voltage levels in elec-
tronic equipment might vary from microvolts (one microvolt is equal to
0.000001 volt) to the kilovolt level (1000 volts). The instrument used to
measure voltage is the voltmeter. Voltmeters are available in many
types including the VOM (volt-ohm-milliammeter), VTVM (vacuum-
tube voltmeter), and the TVM (transistorized voltmeter).
The flow of electrical charge or current in a conductor is defined in
units of amperes. Like voltage levels, current in electronic circuits can
Atoms
Magnified section
of copper wire
Section of copper wire
Free electrons in
random motion
Atoms
Free electrons in
motion to positive
pole of battery Magnified section
of copper wire
Section of copper wire
connected to battery
Battery

BA
Flow of free electrons in copper wire. (A) When copper wire is not connected to a cir-
cuit, free electrons travel in random directions. (B) When copper wire is connected to a
circuit, free electrons are attracted to positive pole of the battery.
F I G U R E 4 . 3
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 95
vary from microamperes (0.000001 ampere) to many amperes. Current
meters, called ammeters, are used to measure current.
Conductors and insulators
In electrical terms, all materials can be divided into two basic
categories—conductors and insulators. Conductors possess large num-
bers of free electrons and are capable of conducting sizable amounts of
electrical current. Silver is the best conductor, followed closely by cop-
per, gold, and aluminum.
Materials that have very few free electrons are known as insula-
tors. Almost all of the electrons in the outer atomic orbits of these
materials are tightly bound in their orbits. Glass, wood, plastics, air,
and distilled water fall into this category. Electrons can only be dis-
lodged from their orbits when extremely high voltage levels are
placed across these materials. For example, air is an efficient insula-
tor until subjected to a voltage level of about 30,000 volts per cen-
timeter (or about 76,000 volts per inch). Mica, one of the best known
insulators, will withstand voltage levels of about 2,000,000 volts per
centimeter (or about 5,000,000 volts per inch) before it breaks down
and acts as a conductor.
An “in-between” group of materials, being neither good conductors
nor insulators, includes resistors and semiconductors. Resistors are
simply materials with a limited number of free electrons and are used
for controlling current in a circuit. The action of semiconductors is
covered in Chap. 5.
Resistance and resistors
Resistance can be considered as opposition to the flow of current in a
circuit. In the water pipe analogy, the size of the pipe controls the
amount of water that can flow for a given pressure. A smaller pipe
restricts the flow of water. Similarly, a conductor having fewer free
electrons restricts the flow of current for a given voltage.
The flow of free electrons in a material as a result of an applied
voltage is opposed by force similar to friction. This opposition is due
to the countless number of collisions between the free electrons and
atoms in the material. Energy in the form of heat is generated, raising
the temperature of the material. If the voltage applied to the material is
to a critical level, the amount of heat can raise the temperature past the
96 CHAPTER FOUR
melting point of the material. At this point, the material will vaporize
and the electrical component will be destroyed or damaged. For exam-
ple, applying too much voltage across a lamp or flashlight bulb will
burn out the filament.
The unit of resistance is the ohm. Resistors used in electronic cir-
cuits can possess values of resistance ranging from less than one ohm
to millions of ohms (or megohms). The values of many units in elec-
tronics vary over a wide range. A list of standard numerical expres-
sions is given in Table 4.1. These terms apply to voltage, current,
resistance, and many other electrical units.
Resistors are available in many types and sizes, and can have
either fixed or variable values. Figure 4.4 shows some of the typical
resistors used in amateur radio equipment. The resistors shown on
the left are fixed power types and are usually wirewound. The fixed
carbon composition resistors in the center range from 1
⁄8 watt to 2
watts. Variable resistors and potentiometers are shown on the right.
Other fixed resistors include metal film, oxide, and film-chip types
with power ratings of 1
⁄16 to 1 watt. The size of the resistor usually
indicates the power rating, and the color bands or stripes provide a
coding for the value of resistance and tolerance factor. Table 4.2
shows the color-code scheme used for these types of resistors. The
values of resistances normally vary from 2.7 ohms to 22 megohms. In
Table 4.1. Numerical Expressions Used in Electronics
Multiplying Value in
Expression Abbreviation factor powers of ten
giga G 1,000,000,000 109
mega M 1,000,000 106
kilo k 1000 10 3
milli m 0.001 10 –3
micro μ 0.000001 10–6
nano n 0.000000001 10–9
pico p 0.000000000001 10–12
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 97
some instances, carbon composition resistors with values of one ohm
or less are available.
The tolerance factor of a resistor indicates the range that the resis-
tance value can vary due to manufacturing differences. Carbon com-
position resistors are available with tolerances of 5% (gold band), 10%
(silver band), and 20% (no tolerance band). For example, a 1-KΩ (or
1000-ohm) resistor with a tolerance of 10% might vary from 900 ohms
to 1100 ohms and still be in tolerance. Resistors with low tolerance rat-
ings cost more and generally are not used unless the circuit requires a
more precise value of resistance. Special resistors with tolerance fac-
tors of 1% or less are available for special applications.
Variable resistors are available either as rheostats (two-terminal
devices) or potentiometers (three terminals). The rheostat is simply a
resistor capable of being adjusted over a specified range of resistance.
The potentiometer, as the name implies, is a variable potential device
acting as a voltage-divider network. The potentiometer is used to con-
trol the level of voltage being applied to a circuit element. For exam-
ple, a potentiometer might serve as a volume control in a receiver,
allowing the level of the audio signals to be varied as desired.
The instrument used to measure the resistance of a resistor or
between any two points of an electrical circuit is the ohmmeter.
Typical resistors used in amateur radio and other electronic equipment.
F I G U R E 4 . 4
98 CHAPTER FOUR
Some Basic Electrical Laws
So far we have covered voltage, current, and resistance, the three basic
electrical units used in electrical measurements. These three units are
interrelated; you can’t change one of these units in a particular circuit
without changing the others. Figure 4.5 shows a simple circuit con-
sisting of a battery and a resistor. When we apply one volt across a one-
ohm resistor, we find that one ampere of current flows in this circuit.
George Simon Ohm, a German school teacher, set up a similar circuit
in 1828 and discovered this relationship.
Table 4-2. Resistor Color Code and Method of Marketing
Color of Significant Tolerance,
band figures Multiplier percent (%)
Black 0 1 —
Brown 1 10 —
Red 2 100 —
Orange 3 1000 —
Yellow 4 10,000 —
Green 5 100,000 —
Blue 6 1,000,000 —
Violet 7 10,000,000 —
Gray 8 100,000,000 —
White 9 1,000,000,000 —
Gold — 0.1 5
Silver — 0.01 10
No Color — — 20
Resistor with color code bands
First significant figure
Second significant figure
Tolerance factor
Multiplier
Red-red-brown-gold
equals 220 ohms
with a 5% tolerance
Example:
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 99
Ohm’s law
Ohm’s law is often referred to as the foundation of electricity. It can be
applied to the flow of current in a single resistor or to a complex cir-
cuit involving many series- and parallel-connected resistors. The rela-
tionship between current, voltage, and resistance can be expressed by
the following simple equation:
I  amperes (Eq. 4.1)
where
I is the current in amperes
V is the voltage in volts
R is the resistance in ohms
This equation is useful for solving for current when the voltage and
resistance values are known. For example, if you connect a 10-ohm
resistor across a 12-volt battery, the resulting current flow is 12/10, or
1.2 amperes. Ohm’s law can be restated in two additional equations
when solving for voltage or current:
To find voltage when current and resistance values are given:
V  I × R volts (Eq. 4.2)
To find resistance when voltage and current values are given:
R  ohms (Eq. 4.3)
When you use Ohm’s law, you must
express voltage, current, and resistance in
units of volts, amperes, and ohms, respec-
tively. Current, for example, cannot be
expressed in units of milliamperes or
microamperes. All such values must be
converted to the basic units of measure-
ment. The following example illustrates
the use of Ohm’s law.
Example 1 If the current through a 2-K
resistor is found to be 3 mA, what is the
voltage across the resistor?
V
I
V
R
Electrical circuit illustrating the definition of one
ohm of resistance. (A) Pictorial representation.
(B) Schematic symbol representation.
Resistance of one ohm
Current flow
of 1 ampere

1 ampere
1 ohm
1 V

Battery
1 V
A B
F I G U R E 4 . 5
100 CHAPTER FOUR
Solution
Step A. Convert the 2-K resistance to ohms:
1000 × 2  2000 ohms
Step B. Convert the 3 mA to amperes:
0.001 × 3  0.003 ampere
Step C. Using Equation 4.2, compute the voltage across the resistor:
V  I × R  0.003 × 2000  6 volts (Answer)
Resistors in series
Many electronic circuits have more than one resistor connected in
series. Figure 4.6 shows networks with two, three, and four resistors in
series. In order to find the total resistance of two or more resistors in
series, simply add the values of each individual resistor:
RT  R1 R2 R3 . . . ohms (Eq. 4.4)
where
RT is the total value of resistance
R1, R2, R3, etc., are the values of each resistor
Resistors in parallel
When two or more resistors are connected in parallel, the resulting resis-
tance of the parallel network is less than the value of the smallest resistor.
In the simple case where the value of each resistor is the same, the value
610 840 2000 1500 7500 100K 75K
R T = R1 R2
= 610 480
= 1090 ohms
RT = R1 R2 R3
= 2000 1500 7500
= 11,000 ohms (or 11K ohms)
= 6.8K 100K 75K 47K
= 228.8K ohms
(or 228,800 ohms)
RT = R1 R2 R3 R4
6.8K 47K
A B C
Examples of resistors in series. (A) Two resistors in series. (B) Three resistors in series. (C) Four resistors in
series.
F I G U R E 4 . 6
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 101
of the parallel combination is equal to the value of any one resistor
divided by the number of resistors. For example, if four 100-ohm resistors
are connected in parallel, the resulting resistance is 100/4, or 25 ohms.
When two resistors of unequal values are connected in parallel, the
resulting resistance is found by the following equation:
R T  ohms (Eq. 4.5)
where
RT is the resulting parallel resistance
R1 and R2 are values of each individual resistor
A more complex equation is required to compute the parallel resis-
tance of three or more unequal resistors. A pocket calculator is handy
for computing parallel resistances when using this equation or Equa-
tion 4.5.
(Eq. 4.6)
Figure 4.7 illustrates parallel combinations of resistors and exam-
ples for computing these different cases.
Series-parallel combinations
Any complex combination of series and parallel resistors can be
reduced to a single equivalent resistance. In general, you determine
the equivalent resistance of each parallel combination separately as a
first step. Then add up all of these equivalent resistances to find the
total circuit resistance. Sometimes it helps to redraw the circuit at
each step. Figure 4.8 shows an example of reducing a complex net-
work to a single value of resistance.
Current flow in series dc circuits
The current flowing in a series dc circuit is the same level at any
point in the circuit. For example, in Fig. 4.9, the current leaving the
positive terminal of the battery is equal to the current flowing
through the resistor. In this simple circuit, Ohm’s law can be used to
compute the circuit current. This type of circuit is referred to as a
direct-current or dc circuit because the current flows only in one
direction.
R1 × R2
R1 R2
1
R1
1
R2
1
R3
. . .
1
RT  ohms
102 CHAPTER FOUR
When two or more batteries and resistors are connected in a series
circuit, such as Fig. 4.10A, the total circuit voltage and resistance must
be determined before the current can be computed. This bring us to a
new concept—how battery voltages are added in a series circuit. The
following steps are used to analyze this circuit:
 Batteries connected in series-aiding have a total voltage equal to
the sum of the individual batteries. In this case, batteries A and
B are connected in series-aiding and their resulting voltage is 12
+ 6, or 18 volts.
 Batteries connected in series-opposing have a total voltage
equal to the difference of the individual batteries. The result-
ing polarity of the combination is equal to the polarity of the
higher battery voltage. Thus in Fig. 4.10A, the AB combination
of 18 volts is opposing the 6 volts of battery C. The three bat-
1200
1200
150
150
150
56
150
24
68
100
R T = where
N = 2
=1200
2 = 600 ohms
RT = where
N = 3
= 150
3 = 50 ohms
RT = R1   R2
= 56   150
R1 R2
56 150
= 8400
206
= 40.8 ohms
RT = 1
R1 R2 R3
1 1 1
1
24 68 100
1 1 1
= 15.1 ohms
A B C
N
R1
N
R1
Examples of resistors in parallel. (A) Parallel resistors of equal value. (B) Two parallel
resistors of unequal value. (C) Three parallel resistors of unequal value.
F I G U R E 4 . 7
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 103
teries connected in series result in a net voltage of 12 + 6 – 6,
or 12 volts. In other words, one 6-
volt battery connected in one direc-
tion cancels out the other 6-volt
battery connected in the opposite
direction.
 The total circuit resistance in Fig.
4.10A is equal to the sum of the indi-
vidual resistors, or 30 + 35 + 5 + 20 +
30, or 120 ohms.
 Ohm’s law can now be used to com-
pute the current flowing in the cir-
cuit.
A F
60
40
B C D E
500
500
500
100 56 75
Original circuit
Compute parallel resistance of AB: Compute parallel resistance of CD:
RAB =60   40
60 40 = 2400
100 = 24 ohms RCD = 500
3 =167 ohms
A
24 100 167 56 75
A B C D E F
B
A F
422
C
Resistors in series-parallel combinations can be reduced to an equivalent single circuit
resistance. (A) Reduce parallel networks AB and CD to equivalent resistances. (B) Redraw
the circuit showing only series resistances. Add values of series resistances to obtain
total circuit resistance. (C) Total resistance of series-parallel combination of resistors.
F I G U R E 4 . 8
Current flow in a series circuit.
A A
A AA D
B C12
Direction of
current flow
I
6 V battery
I = V
R
6
12
==
= 0.5 Ampere
F I G U R E 4 . 9
104 CHAPTER FOUR
IR voltage drops
This brings us to another new concept—the voltage across any resistor
in a series circuit is equal to the current times the resistance (from
Ohm’s law). This gives us a powerful tool for computing the voltage at
any point in a series circuit. Figure 4.10C shows the voltage across
each resistor based on a current of 0.1 ampere.
If you add up the voltage drops in a series circuit, you find that
their sum is equal to the source voltage. In Fig. 4.10C, note that the IR
R2 R3 R4
R1
30
R5
30
A B C
12 V 6 V 6 V
I I R T = R1 R2 R3 R4 R5
= 30 35 5 20 30 = 120 ohms
VT = V1 V2  V3 = 12 6  6 = 12 VOLTS
A
120
12 V
0.1 A
I = VT
RT
12
120
= =0.1A=100 mA
B
12 V
3.5 V 0.5 V 2 V
3 V 30 30 3 V
30 5 20
C
V1 = IR1 = 0.1   30 = 3.0 V
V2 = IR2 = 0.1   35 = 3.5 V
V3 = IR3 = 0.1   5 = 0.5 V
V4 = IR4 = 0.1   20 = 2.0 V
V5 = IR5 = 0.1   30 = 3.0 V
35 5 20
Analysis of a series dc circuit. (A) The original series dc circuit. (B) The circuit reduced
to an equivalent circuit. (C) Calculating IR voltage drops.
F I G U R E 4 . 1 0
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 105
drops of 3, 3.5, 0.5, 2, and 3 volts are equal to the effective source volt-
age of 12 volts.
Current flow in parallel dc circuits
When two resistors are connected in parallel across a battery, the cur-
rent flowing through each resistor depends on the resistance encoun-
tered. Consider the circuit in Fig. 4.11. The battery voltage across
resistor R1 is the same as the voltage across resistor R2. However, the
current through R1 is 12/24, or 0.5 ampere and the current through R2
is 12/12 or 1.0 ampere. Therefore, the battery must supply a total of 0.5
and 1.0, or 1.5 amperes to the parallel network.
This simple example demonstrates an important concept in current
flow—the current entering a parallel network is equal to the sum of the
individual branch currents within the network. At point A in Fig. 4.11,
the total current IT supplied by the battery is equal to the sum of I1 and
I2, the individual branch currents.
You can use this concept to compute the current flow in any series-
parallel network. First, it is necessary to compute the total circuit
resistance and the total current flowing in the circuit. The second step
is to compute the IR voltage drop across each parallel network. After
this is done, the currents in each parallel network can readily be com-
puted. Note that most of these computations use different variations of
Ohm’s law.
R1
R2
12
12 V
I T IT
I1I1
24
I 2 I2
A
Voltage across each resistor
is 12 V.
I1 =
I2 =
IT = I1 I2 = 0.5 1.0 = 1.5 Ampere
V
R 1
= 12
24 = 0.5 Ampere
V
R 2
= 12
12 = 1.0 Ampere
Parallel dc circuit analysis.
F I G U R E 4 . 1 1
106 CHAPTER FOUR
Magnetism
The attraction and repulsion properties of magnets are similar to those
described previously for electrical forces. Recorded history of experi-
ments with natural magnets dates back some 2600 years to when the
early Greek scientists described the magnetic properties of an ore
material. This material, known as magnetite or lodestone, is the only
substance occurring in nature that possesses magnetic qualities. Chi-
nese sailors used crude forms of magnetic compasses as early as the
second century for navigation purposes.
It was not until the early 1800s that the relationship between elec-
tricity and magnetism was discovered. A Danish physicist, Hans
Christian Oersted, found that a compass placed near a conductor car-
rying an electrical current would swing away from north and point
toward the conductor. Later, it was discovered that a current-carrying
conductor wound around an iron rod would create a magnetic field
and magnetize the rod. You can make a simple magnet by winding an
insulated wire around an iron nail and connecting the two ends of the
insulated wire to a battery. Figure 4.12 illustrates this simple experi-
ment. The compass is used to detect the presence of a magnetic field.
Prior to connecting the battery to the coil, the compass will point
toward the magnetic north pole of the earth. When the battery is con-
nected to the circuit, the compass needle will swing from the magnetic
north to the direction of the nail magnet.
The magnetic field
Magnetic fields exhibit unique forces of
attraction and repulsion. For convenience
of notation, the two ends of a magnet are
designated north and south poles. All
magnets possess a north and a south pole.
Magnetic lines of force emerge from the
north pole and travel back to the south
pole of the magnet. Figure 4.13 illustrates
the distribution of magnetic lines of force
surrounding a bar magnet. The magnetic
field intensity is greatest at each end of the
magnet. The total number of magnetic
A simple magnetconsisting of a soft iron nail, a con-
ductor (insulated) wound around the nail, and a
battery.
Magnetic field
South
pole North
pole
Earth's
magnetic
pole
Compass
Battery

Current
flow
F I G U R E 4 . 1 2
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 107
lines of force traveling from the north to
the south pole is called the magnetic flux.
The flux density of a magnetic field is
defined as the number of lines per unit
area at a given point. The more lines there
are per unit area, the stronger the magnetic
field will be.
If the north pole of a magnet is placed
near the south pole of a second magnet,
the two magnets will be attracted to each
other. However, if two like poles (north-north or south-south) of two
magnets are placed close together, there is a repelling force and the
two magnets will attempt to move away from each other. This action is
known as the law of magnetic poles and can be stated as follows: Like
poles repel; unlike poles attract.
Although magnetic behavior of attraction and repulsion is similar to
that of electrically charged particles, there is one fundamental difference.
The electrically charged particle will possess either a negative or positive
charge over its entire surface. A magnet, on the other hand, will always
possess a north pole at one end and a south pole at the other end. These
twin poles can never be separated as individual entities.
Temporary and permanent magnets
Soft iron, such as the nail in Fig. 4.12, will retain magnetism as long as
the current flows through the wire. When the current is turned off, the
nail will lose most of its magnetism. This type of magnet is called a
temporary magnet. The remaining magnetism left in the nail is
referred to as residual magnetism.
When hard iron or steel is placed in a magnetic field, it will retain
most of the magnetic property after the magnetic field is removed.
When these types of materials are magnetized, they are referred to as
permanent magnets. Most speakers in amateur receivers contain a
powerful permanent magnet placed next to the voice coil. These
speakers are designated as permanent-magnet, or pm, speakers.
Electromagnetism
A magnetic field is generated around a conductor when an electrical
current flows through the conductor. The intensity of the magnetic
Magnetic field or flux distribution for a permanent
magnet.
Unit area point A
North pole South pole
Unit area point B
F I G U R E 4 . 1 3
108 CHAPTER FOUR
field is directly related to the amplitude of the current; any increase in
current results in a comparable increase in the magnetic field. Figure
4.14 illustrates this action.
If the conductor is wound in the form of a coil, as shown in Fig.
4.15, the strength or intensity of the magnetic field is increased many
times. The magnetic lines of force associated with each turn of the
conductor combine in the same direction with the magnetic lines of
force from the other turns. Thus, more lines of magnetic force will be
concentrated in a small space, all passing through the center of the
coil.
A coil designed to create a magnetic field for exerting physical
force or performing work in an electrical circuit is called an electro-
magnet. Electric motors, relays, solenoids, and headphones are some
of the devices that use electromagnets for performing work functions.
Magnetomotive force (MMF)
The amount of magnetic force or strength
of an electromagnet depends on the
amount of current flowing in the coil, the
number of turns, and the type of core
material used in the coil. The first two fac-
tors, current in amperes and number of
turns of the conductor, can be expressed in
ampere-turns. This represents the magne-
tomotive force or magnetic potential, sim-
ilar to the concept of electromotive force
Current flow

Battery
Expanded view of
conductor
Magnetic field
surrounding
conductor
Magnetic field created by current flowing in a conductor.
F I G U R E 4 . 1 4
Magnetic field created by current flowing in a coil of
wire.
M
a
g
n
e
ti
c
field
North pole South pole
Current
flow
Battery

F I G U R E 4 . 1 5
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 109
(MMF) or voltage potential difference in
electrical circuits.
Electromagnetic induction
When a conductor is moved through a
magnetic field, cutting against the lines of
magnetic force, a voltage will be induced
in the conductor. Figure 4.16 shows the
effect of moving a conductor through a
magnetic field. This principle of electro-
magnetic induction is the basis for the
operation of electric generators, transform-
ers, and even radio antennas.
Alternating current and voltage
At the beginning of this chapter the concepts of direct current (dc)
were used to demonstrate the relationships of voltage, current, and
resistance. These same concepts can be used to look at the principles
of alternating current (ac).
When the direction of current flow is reversed at periodic intervals,
the resulting varying current is known as alternating current. The voltage
producing an alternating current is, by definition, an alternating voltage
that continuously varies in amplitude and periodically reverses its polar-
ity. An ac generator is a source of alternating voltage.
The ac sine wave
Almost all ac waveforms encountered in radio communications, as well
as the familiar 120-Vac, 60-Hz power in our homes, are sine waves. Let’s
take a look at the 60-Hz power and define some basics of ac waveforms.
These basics are also applicable at audio and radio frequencies.
Figure 4.17 shows two complete cycles of the standard 120-Vac, 60-
Hz voltage waveform. We call this a 60-Hz voltage because the fre-
quency is 60 hertz, or 60 complete cycles per second.
The period of time for each cycle is directly related to the frequency
by the following equation:
f  or (Eq. 4.7)
T  (Eq. 4.8)
1
f
1
T
Voltage induced by a moving conductor in a magnetic
field between two permanent magnets.
Direction of motionMagnetic field
Magnet Magnet
N S N S
Conductor V1 Induced voltage
F I G U R E 4 . 1 6
110 CHAPTER FOUR
where
f is the frequency in Hz
T is the period of each cycle in seconds
Thus, the period or the duration of each ac cycle of the 120-Vac, 60-
Hz voltage is 1
⁄60 , or 0.0167 seconds (16.67 milliseconds).
We are familiar with the expression 120 Vac power. However, Fig.
4.17 shows that the maximum values of voltage range from a positive
170 volts to a negative 170 volts during each ac cycle. This results in a
peak-to-peak voltage of 340 Vac.
The ac voltage and current values are often expressed in rms terms.
The expression rms is an abbreviation for “root mean square,” a math-
ematical expression for describing the effective value of an ac wave-
form. In practical terms, a 120-Vac, 60-Hz source provides the same
amount of power that a 120-Vdc source would provide. This is a con-
venient way to measure ac power. For example, a 120-volt light bulb
will glow with an equal brilliance when connected to either a 120-Vac
or 120-Vdc source.
Peak value
RMS value
Peak-to-peak
voltage
340 V
1/60 Sec. 1/60 Sec.
170
120
0
170
Amplitude of sine wave-volts
Two complete cycles of a 120-Vac, 60-Hz sine wave.
F I G U R E 4 . 1 7
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 111
The relationship between peak ac voltage and rms voltage for a sine
waveform is given by the following equation. This also applies to peak
ac and rms current values.
Vp  1.414 Vrms or (Eq. 4.9)
Vrms  0.707 VP (Eq. 4.10)
where
VP is the peak value of the ac voltage
Vrms is the rms or root-mean-square value of the ac voltage
Each ac sine wave is divided into 360 electrical degrees. This
helps us to designate the phase relationships of two or more ac wave-
forms which are not in phase with each other. Figure 4.18 shows volt-
age and current waveforms with both in-phase and out-of-phase
relationships.
ac circuits
The analyses of ac circuits are more com-
plex when compared to dc circuits. Some
of the unusual characteristics of ac circuits
that have no equal in dc circuits are:
 Opposition to ac current flow in an ac
circuit is not limited to resistance.
The total opposition to ac current
flow is known as impedance, which
includes resistance. Impedance also
includes capacitive reactance (ac
opposition developed by a capacitor)
and inductive reactance (ac opposi-
tion developed by an inductor). Like
resistance, impedance, capacitive
reactance, and inductive reactance
are measured in units of ohms. The
symbols used for impedance, capaci-
tive reactance, and inductive reac-
tance are Z, XC, and XL, respectively.
Phase relationships showing both in-phase and out-
of phase voltage and current. (A) Current and voltage
in phase. (B) Current leading voltage by 90 degrees.
0
0 90 180 270 360
V
I
V
I
I
V
V
I
A
I
V
0
V
I
I
V
I
B
0 90 180 270 360
Peak value of voltage
Peak value of current
F I G U R E 4 . 1 8
112 CHAPTER FOUR
 ac current will flow through a capacitor, but a capacitor will
block the flow of dc current. As the frequency of the ac current
is increased, the capacitive reactance in ohms will decrease. At
high frequencies, a capacitor can act as a short circuit for all
practical purposes.
 An inductor or coil possesses both inductance and dc resis-
tance. The inductance produces an inductive reactance that
increases as the frequency of operation is increased. In a dc cir-
cuit, only the dc resistance of the coil offers opposition to the
flow of current. However, in an ac circuit both inductive reac-
tance and dc resistance offer opposition to the flow of current.
As the frequency is increased, the ac opposition will increase
until finally the inductor acts as an open circuit. For all practi-
cal purposes, this reduces the ac current flow to zero.
 In an ac circuit, energy can be transferred from one circuit to
another by the electromagnetic induction action of transformers
with no physical connection between the circuits. Also, trans-
formers can be used to step-up or step-down ac voltages or cur-
rents. In dc circuits, there are no equivalent transfer
characteristics.
 In an ac circuit, the phase relationship between voltage and cur-
rent may vary such that the voltage may lead or lag the current
by a given phase angle usually expressed in electrical degrees.
There is no similar parallel in dc circuits—the voltage is always
in phase with the current.
Capacitors and Capacitance
Capacitors, originally called condensers, are used in almost every elec-
tronic circuit. A typical amateur transceiver will have almost as many
capacitors as resistors, which are probably the most widely used compo-
nents. Capacitors are available in a wide variety of sizes, capacitances,
and working-voltage ratings. They can be divided into two broad cate-
gories—fixed and variable. Capacitors perform many functions, which
include:
 Coupling, transferring, and bypassing ac current.
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 113
 Blocking dc voltages and currents.
 Storing electrical energy and subsequent discharge of the charge
stored in the capacitor.
 Tuning frequency-sensitive circuits.
Figure 4.19 shows a collection of typical capacitors used in ama-
teur radio equipment.
The capacitors shown on the left are variable capacitors, used for
tuning radio-frequency circuits. Fixed coupling and bypass capacitors
are shown in the center. These include paper, mylar, ceramic, and
mica types. On the right are electrolytic capacitors, commonly used as
filter capacitors in power supplies and related applications. The bot-
tom-right capacitor is a low-voltage tantalum capacitor available in the
range of about 0.1 to 100 microfarads.
We can define capacitance as the ability to store an electrical charge
in a dielectric or insulating material. A simple capacitor, shown in Fig.
4.20, consists of two metal plates separated by a dielectric material
such as air, glass, mica, or ceramic. The amount of capacitance devel-
oped by such a capacitor is related to the surface area of the plates, the
Typical capacitors used in amateur radio and other electronic equipment.
F I G U R E 4 . 1 9
114 CHAPTER FOUR
separation of the plates, and the dielectric
constant of the dielectric material.
Capacitance is measured in units of
farads (F). Because the farad is usually too
large for most electronic applications, you
will find the farad microfarads and
micromicrofarads (or picofarads).
1 microfarad  1 μF  0.000001 F  1 ×
10 –6 F
1 micromicrofarad  1 μμF 
0.000000000001 F  1 × 10–12 F
1 picofarad  1 pF  1 μμF  1 micromi-
crofarad
How capacitors work
In performing its function in a circuit, a capacitor is charged and dis-
charged sometimes as fast as millions to billions of times per second.
A simple way to illustrate the action of a capacitor is to connect it
across a battery as shown in Fig. 4.21A. The positive pole of the battery
attracts the free electrons in the upper plate of the capacitor, leaving a
net positive charge on this upper plate. At the same time, the negative
pole of the battery repels the free electrons in the lower conductor,
forcing them toward the lower plate of the capacitor. This results in a
Simple capacitor consisting of two metal plates
placed close to each other.
Terminal
Metal plate
Metal plate
Terminal
Air dielectric
F I G U R E 4 . 2 0
Switch
Free
electron
flow
6 - volt
battery C

Capacitor
A
 6 VC
B
C RI
Current
flow
C
Charging and discharging action in a capacitor. (A) Charging the capacitor. (B) The capac-
itor remains charged when removed from the circuit. (C) Discharging the capacitor.
F I G U R E 4 . 2 1
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 115
net negative charge on the lower plate. This current flow continues
until the voltage across the capacitor plates is equal to the battery volt-
age, 6 volts in this case. The capacitor is then fully charged.
The positive and negative charges on the capacitor plates create an
electric field between the two plates. This field distorts the molecular
structure of the dielectric material, producing an electrical stress. In
this manner an electric charge is stored in the dielectric.
The charged capacitor can now be disconnected from the battery,
retaining an electrical charge that can perform work (Fig. 4.21B). If the
capacitor is connected to a load such as a resistor as shown in Fig.
4.21C, the charge within the capacitor causes a current to flow until
the electrical energy is dissipated in the resistor in the form of heat. At
this point, the voltage across the capacitor drops to zero and the capac-
itor is discharged.
Capacitor voltage ratings
If the battery voltage in Fig. 4.21 is raised above the specified working
voltage of the capacitor, the dielectric material will break down and
conduct a heavy current. This action will damage or destroy many
types of capacitors. The working voltage, usually specified by the man-
ufacturer, is defined as the maximum amount of voltage that can be
placed across the capacitor for safe, sustained operation. This voltage
rating is usually expressed in terms of dc voltage (Vdc) levels. The
working voltage ratings of capacitors can range from as low as 3 Vdc to
thousands of volts dc.
If an ac voltage is to be placed across a capacitor, the peak value of
the ac voltage must be used in selecting a capacitor with an adequate
voltage rating.
Connecting capacitors in parallel
If two or more capacitors are connected in parallel, as shown in Fig.
4.22, the total capacitance is equal to the sum of the individual capac-
itors. This relationship is expressed as follows:
CT  C1 C2 C3 . . . (Eq. 4.11)
where
CT is the total capacitance of the parallel combination in farads
C1, C2, C3, etc., are the values of each individual capacitor in farads
116 CHAPTER FOUR
Note that some capacitors are polarized
i.e., the terminals are designated + and –
(positive and negative). This is characteris-
tic of most electrolytic capacitors. The
polarity must be observed in parallel as
indicated in Fig. 4.22. Furthermore, when
electronic capacitors are connected in cir-
cuits with dc potentials, the + terminal of the
capacitor must be connected to the positive terminal of the circuit. Oth-
erwise, the electrolytic capacitor might be damaged by the dc potential.
Connecting capacitors in series
The total capacitance of two or more capacitors connected in series is
always less than the value of the smallest capacitor. One way to
remember how to compute the value of series capacitors is that it is the
same method used to compute resistors in parallel.
Three equations are available for computing the net capacitance of
capacitors connected in series. Figure 4.23 shows typical series capac-
itor circuits.
Two capacitors in series (Fig. 4.23A):
CT  farads (Eq. 4.12)
Three or more capacitors in series (Fig. 4.23B):
(Eq. 4.13)
Any number n capacitors in series where the value of each capaci-
tor is equal to the value C (Fig. 4.23C):
CT  farads (Eq. 4.14)
Capacitive reactance
The alternating charge and discharge action of a capacitor allows an ac
current to flow in a circuit. However, a capacitor, like a resistor, offers
opposition to the flow of the ac current. This opposition, or capacitive
reactance, depends upon the value of capacitance and the frequency of
C
n
C1 × C2
C1 C2
Parallel connection of capacitors.
C1 C2 C3 Cr
1 F 4F 5F 10F
F I G U R E 4 . 2 2
1
C1
1
C2
1
C3
. . .
1
CT  farads
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 117
the ac voltage being impressed on the capacitor. This relationship is
expressed as follows:
Xc  (Eq. 4.15)
where
Xc is the capacitive reactance in ohms
π is the constant pi, which is equal to 3.1416
f is the frequency in hertz
C is the capacitance in farads
For convenience in computations, this equation may be reduced to
Xc  ohms
The units of frequency and capacitance must be expressed in hertz
and farads, respectively, when using these above equations. Note that
when several capacitors are connected in series or parallel, the result-
ing capacitance from such combinations can be used to find the total
capacitive reactance involved.
0.159
fC
1
2π fC
C1 C2 CT
A
B
C
C1 C2 C3
C1 C2 C3 C4
CT
CT
30F 60F
0.01F 0.02F 0.05F
100 pF 100 pF 100 pF 100 pF 25 pF
0.0059F
20F
Series capacitor circuits. (A) Two capacitors in series. (B) Three capacitors in series.
(C) Four capacitors of equal value in series.
F I G U R E 4 . 2 3
118 CHAPTER FOUR
Phase angle of capacitors
The current flow in a capacitor leads the
voltage across the capacitor by 90 electri-
cal degrees. This means that current flow
must start before any voltage is developed
across the capacitor. This action was
demonstrated in Fig. 4.21.
Figure 4.24 shows the relationship
between voltage and current when an ac
voltage is impressed across the capacitor. At
0 and 180 degrees, the current flow is at a
maximum and the voltage across the capac-
itor is zero volts. Conversely, at 90 and 270
degrees, the voltage levels are at a maximum while the current flow is
zero amperes.
Testing capacitors
Any capacitor can be quickly tested with a multimeter (set to measure
resistance) to determine if it is shorted or leaky. With the exception of
electrolytic capacitors, the resistance of virtually all other types
should be infinite in value. For example, capacitors with air, mica,
glass, ceramic, and similar dielectric materials should indicate an
open circuit (infinite resistance) when tested with an ohmmeter.
CAUTION: Don’t try to test the capacitor when it is soldered in a
“live” or powered-up circuit. Turn off all power to the circuit being
tested by unplugging the ac power cord! Otherwise, you might
experience a severe or fatal electrical shock. In many cases, you might
also damage the multimeter or the circuit being tested. Damage to the
multimeter can range from virtual destruction to requiring
replacement of an internal fuse within the instrument.
When you try to test a capacitor that is soldered in a circuit, adja-
cent resistors or other components connected in this circuit might
show resistance on your multimeter, falsely indicating a defective
capacitor. Unsolder one end of the capacitor before you test for a short
or leaky condition. Any observable resistance reading for these types
of capacitors indicates a defective component.
Phase relationships between current and voltage in a
capacitor.
0 0 90 180 270 360
I
I
V
V
V
V
I
I
Relative amplitude
F I G U R E 4 . 2 4
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 119
Unfortunately, the above continuity test will not indicate a defective
capacitor with an open circuit. Further tests with a capacitor tester are
required to ensure that the capacitor has the required capacitance. Some
digital multimeters, including the portable handheld types, also have a
capacitance test capability. Before buying any multimeter for your ham
shack, you might want to consider one with this expanded test capability.
Many electrolytic capacitors, ranging from about 1 microfarad to
many thousands of microfarads, will show some leakage resistance
and still perform satisfactorily in a circuit. With a little experience,
you will be able to check almost any type of capacitor with a multime-
ter. In most cases, the capacitor must be removed from the circuit for
the test to be meaningful.
Inductors and Inductance
A simple inductor can be described as a coil with one or more turns of
wire, wound around a material known as the core. Some inductors
employ air as the core material. Like capacitors, inductors are used
primarily in ac circuits. Inductors perform many important functions
in electronic circuits such as transferring ac energy from one circuit to
another and as frequency selective elements in RF circuits.
Although many types and sizes of inductors are available from
commercial sources, they are not used as often as resistors and capac-
itors. Most inductors are manufactured for specific applications
involving a given frequency or band of frequencies. In some instances,
you might have to build a coil required for a specific application. How-
ever, coil forms and wire are available for most of these “home-brew”
coils. Figure 4.25 shows a collection of inductors found in ham radio
and other electronic equipment. The coils shown on the left are RF
chokes. At the top center are two torroid inductors, one molded in
plastic and the other a “home-brew” torroid for a project. The coils
shown at the bottom are adjustable inductors with powdered-iron
cores. An adjustable IF transformer, shown in the upper right, is used
in 455-kHz IF amplifier circuits.
Inductance
Inductance is the ability of a conductor to develop an induced voltage
when a varying or alternating current flows through the conductor.
120 CHAPTER FOUR
This induced voltage is produced by the expanding and contracting
magnetic field associated with the varying current.
When the conductor is wound in the form of a coil, the inductance
is increased many times depending on the number of turns. The coiled
conductor concentrates the magnetic field in a smaller volume and the
expanding and contracting field cuts across each turn of wire, simul-
taneously generating a higher voltage.
The inductance of a coil can be increased many times by changing the
core material. For example, a powdered-iron or ferrite core will increase
the inductance of an air-core coil many times. These materials are used
in radio-frequency coils to achieve higher efficiency of operation.
The unit of inductance is the henry (H). One henry is defined as the
amount of inductance that allows one volt to be induced across a coil
when the current through the coil changes at a rate of one ampere per
second. Most coils used in audio- and radio-frequency circuits possess
values of inductance in the millihenry and microhenry range.
1 millihenry  1 mH  0.001 H  1 × 10–3 H
1 microhenry  1 H  0.000001 H  1 × 10–6 H
Typical inductors used in amateur radio and other electronic equipment.
F I G U R E 4 . 2 5
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 121
A unique characteristic of inductances involves the action of the
transformer. If the magnetic field created by one coil cuts across
another coil, a voltage is induced in the second coil. In this manner,
we can transfer ac energy from one circuit or another without any
direct physical connection. Transformers are covered in more detail at
the end of this section.
Series inductors
When two or more inductors are connected in series, as in Fig. 4.26,
the total inductance is equal to the sum of the individual values of
inductances, or:
LT  L1 L2 L3 . . . (Eq. 4.16)
where
LT is the total inductance of the series combination
L1, L2, L3, etc., are the values of the individual inductances
All values of inductances must be expressed in the same units of
henrys.
This equation is not valid if the inductors are placed close together,
resulting in a “transformer action.” Mutual inductance is developed
when the magnetic field from one coil cuts across another coil. In a
series-aiding connection, additional inductance will be produced by
this mutual inductance. On the other hand, if the coils are connected
in a series-opposing manner, the mutual inductance will have a can-
celing effect and the total inductance of the two coils will be less than
the sum of the individual values of inductance.
Parallel inductors
The equations for series and parallel
inductors are similar to those for series
and parallel resistor combinations.
Parallel combinations of inductors are
illustrated in Fig. 4.27. The equations used
to compute the total inductances are given
here. Remember, these equations are not
valid if mutual induction exists between
any of the coils. Inductors connected in series.
LT = 70F
10F 25F 35F
L1 L2 L3
F I G U R E 4 . 2 6
122 CHAPTER FOUR
Two inductors, L1 and L2, connected in parallel (Fig. 4.27A):
LT  henrys (Eq. 4.17)
Two or more inductors connected in parallel (Fig. 4.27B):
L1 × L2
L1 L1
60H
L1
30H
L2
LT = 20H
A
LT =9.26 mH
L3
40 mH
L2
30 mH
L1
20 mH
B
LT =10 H
L3
30 H
L2
30 H
L1
30 H
C
Inductors connected in parallel. (A) Two inductors connected in parallel. (B) Three
inductors of unequal value in parallel. (C) Three inductors of equal value in parallel.
F I G U R E 4 . 2 7
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 123
(Eq. 4.18)
Any number n inductors in parallel where the value of each induc-
tor is equal to the value L (Fig. 4.27C):
LT  henrys (Eq. 4.19)
Inductive reactance, XL
Inductive reactance is the opposition to the flow of ac current devel-
oped by an inductance. It is due to the opposing induced voltage cre-
ated by the expanding and contracting magnetic field. This
opposition, which does not include the dc resistance of the inductor,
is measured in ohms.
Inductive reactance varies directly with both inductance and the
operating frequency. An increase in either factor results in a corre-
sponding increase in inductive reactance. This relationship is
expressed as:
XL = 2πfL or (Eq. 4.20)
XL = 6.28fL (Eq. 4.21)
where
XL is the inductive reactance in ohms
π is the constant pi (3.1416)
f is the frequency in Hz
L is the inductance in hertz
Phase angle of inductors
A varying or alternating current flow produces an induced voltage
across an inductor. In an ideal inductor (one with no dc resistance),
the current lags the induced voltage by 90 electrical degrees. This
means that the phase angle between the voltage and current is 90
degrees, as shown in Fig. 4.28.
This 90-degree phase angle is due to the fact that the induced volt-
age depends on the rate of change in the current flowing through the
inductor. For example, at 0, 180, and 360 degrees, the current is
L
n
1
L1
1
L2
1
L3
. . .
1
LT  henrys
124 CHAPTER FOUR
changing at maximum rate while at 90 and 270 degrees, the rate of
current change approaches zero. We are not referring to actual values
of current, but to how fast the current is changing in value. The volt-
age levels at 0, 180, and 360 degrees are at a maximum because the
rate of current change is highest at these angles. However, the
induced voltage drops to zero at 90 and 270 degrees because the cur-
rent is not changing in value at these angles.
Transformers
The transformer is an electromagnetic device for transforming or chang-
ing alternating voltage or current from one level to another. In its sim-
plest form, a transformer consists of two inductors placed close together
so that a magnetic field generated in one inductor will cut across the
other inductor. This induces a voltage in the second inductor.
Transformers are used in radio and electronic equipment for many
applications. The ac power transformer shown in Fig. 4.29 can be used
in the power supply circuit of an amateur receiver to transform the
120-Vac commercial power to 24 Vac. The power transformer also per-
forms another important function, that of isolating the 120-Vac power
Relative amplitude of current and volume
0 0 90 180 270 360
V V
V
I
I
V
I
I
V
Electrical degrees
Phase relationships between current and voltage for an inductor in an ac circuit.
F I G U R E 4 . 2 8
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 125
line from the common ground connections of the receiver. This helps
to eliminate potential shock hazard to the amateur operator.
The same receiver might contain an audio output transformer to
drive the low-impedance speaker, or RF and IF transformers to couple
RF and IF signals between stages.
Basic transformer concepts
Transformers can be classified as one-to-one, step-up, or step-down,
depending on the ratio of the number of turns in the primary winding
to the number of turns in the secondary winding. A one-to-one trans-
former produces a voltage in the secondary winding equal to that
being applied to the primary winding. The step-up transformer pro-
duces a higher output voltage, when compared to the input voltage
applied to the primary winding.
A typical 120-Vac transformer used in amateur radio and other electronic equipment.
F I G U R E 4 . 2 9
126 CHAPTER FOUR
The turns ratio determines the general operating characteristics of a
transformer: one-to-one, step-up, or step-down. The voltage ratio in
terms of turns ratio is:
 (Eq. 4.22)
where
VP is the voltage across the primary winding in volts
VS is the voltage across the secondary winding in volts
NP is the number of turns in the primary winding
NS is the number of turns in the secondary winding
Equation 4-22 can be rearranged to solve for the secondary voltage
when the primary voltage and the turns ratio are known:
VS  VP (Eq. 4.23)
Step-up and step-down transformers are illustrated in Fig. 4.30
along with calculations required to determine the secondary voltages
for each example.
The ratio of current in the primary winding to current in the sec-
ondary winding is the inverse of the turns and voltage ratios. This can
be expressed as:
  (Eq. 4.24)
VP
VS
NP
NS
IS
IP
NS
NP
NP
NS
VP
VS
NP = 200
Turns NS = 22
Turns
N P = 200
Turns
NS = 1000
Turns
V P
120 Vac VS VS
VP
120 Vac
V S = VP ( NS
NP
) = 120 (1000
200 ) = 600 Vac VS = VP ( NS
NP
) = 120 ( 22
200 ) = 13.2 Vac
A B
Examples of iron core transformers showing the effect of the turns ratio on the sec-
ondary voltage. (A) Step-up transformer provides increased secondary voltage. (B)
Step-down transformer provides reduced secondary voltage.
F I G U R E 4 . 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 127
where
IS is the current in the secondary winding in amperes
IP is the current in the primary winding in amperes
Equation 4-24 can be rearranged to solve for the secondary current,
IS, as follows:
IS  IP  IP (Eq. 4.25)
One interesting aspect of step-up or step-down transformers is that
the step-up transformer reduces the output current available while the
step-down transformer provides for an increase in current in the sec-
ondary winding.
Some transformers have more than one secondary winding. The
equations just given for finding output voltage and current levels must
be used for each secondary winding in relationship to the primary
winding.
Testing inductors and transformers with a multimeter
The multimeter can be used to check inductors and transformers for
open windings and, in some instances, shorted windings. For exam-
ple, if the manufacturer’s specifications regarding the resistance of
windings are available, the multimeter, particularly the digital multi-
meter with precise readout of resistance, can be used to check these
resistance values. If the resistance readings indicated by the multime-
ter are lower than those specified by the manufacturer, one or more
turns of the winding are probably shorted.
CAUTION: Don’t try to test the inductor or transformer when it is
connected in a “live” or powered-up circuit. Turn off all power to the
circuit being tested by unplugging the ac power cord! Otherwise, you
might experience a severe or fatal electrical shock. In many cases, you
can also damage the multimeter or the circuit being tested. Damage to
the multimeter can range from virtual destruction to requiring
replacement of an internal fuse within the instrument.
Large audio inductors and power transformers will exhibit a resis-
tance of a few ohms to 20 ohms or more. Small inductors used in RF
and IF applications will normally show a resistance of one ohm or
NP
NS
VP
VS
128 CHAPTER FOUR
less. The actual resistance will depend on the size of the wire and the
number of turns.
Any inductor or transformer that exhibits an abnormal resistance
reading or an open winding should be replaced with a new component
of equal specifications.
ac Circuit Analysis
Resistors, capacitors, and inductors all offer opposition to the flow of
current in an ac circuit. Although this opposition is always measured in
units of ohms, we find that each component behaves differently in the
circuit. The resistor merely impedes the flow of ac current and dissi-
pates energy in the form of heat. The capacitor and the ideal inductor
offer opposition to ac current flow but do not consume energy. The
energy temporarily stored in each component—an electric field in the
capacitor and a magnetic field in the inductor—is returned to the circuit
during a portion of each cycle.
A complete study of ac circuit analysis is beyond the scope of this
book and the requirements for the Technician Class license. However,
we will review a few concepts that will help to explain the operation
of ac circuits in amateur radio transmitters and receivers.
Impedance and phase angles
Impedance is a measure of the total opposition that a component or cir-
cuit presents to an ac current (power, audio signal, or RF signal). Imped-
ance can contain resistance, capacitive reactance, and inductive
reactance in series and/or parallel combinations.
Impedance must be considered when connecting ac circuits, com-
ponents, or equipment together. For example, the impedance of an HF
antenna for 40 meters, the RF transmission line, and the RF output of
an amateur transmitter are all related. If the impedances of these
devices are not matched, RF power will be lost and the efficiency of
radio transmissions will be reduced. Impedances of other devices
such as microphones, audio amplifiers, and speakers must be consid-
ered when they are connected together as an audio system. In fact,
almost every circuit within a transmitter or receiver relies on the
proper matching of impedances for the required operational charac-
teristics.
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 129
Any analysis of impedance must take into account the phase
angle of the component or circuit involved. Voltages (or currents) in
phase are additive in nature while those out of phase tend to cancel
each other.
Resonance and tuned circuits
The concept of resonance is one of the most important factors in radio
communications. Without resonant or tuned circuits, we would be
unable to separate the desired signal from the many signals inter-
cepted by the antenna. The selectivity of the receiver’s RF and IF
amplifier stages, and the frequency-determining networks of the local
and beat-frequency oscillators, are all related to the phenomenon of
resonance.
The radio transmitter employs tuned circuits for generating, ampli-
fying, and modulating RF signals. Tuned circuits allow the RF signals
to be coupled to the transmission line while attenuating harmonics or
other undesired signals generated within the transmitter. Finally, the
antenna acts as a tuned circuit, resonant only at the frequency of the
signal being transmitted.
The series LC network in Fig. 4.31A acts as a short circuit at the res-
onant frequency. This is due to the fact that the capacitive reactance is
equal but opposite to the inductive reactance. As a result, the reactances
L
C
Capacitive
reactance
Impedance ohms
Inductive
reactance
Resonant
frequency
A B
Receiver
Antenna
Ground
L
C
Frequency
The resonant series LC network. (A) Characteristics of a resonant series LC network.
(B) The resonant series LC network used as a wave trap.
F I G U R E 4 . 3 1
130 CHAPTER FOUR
cancel and the impedance of the network is zero ohms. However, above
and below the resonant frequency, the LC network exhibits inductive
and capacitive reactance, respectively. Series resonant networks are
sometimes used as wave traps in antenna circuits to bypass interfering
signals (of a different frequency) to ground. Figure 4.31B illustrates this
type of application.
Parallel resonant LC networks, such as shown in Fig. 4.32, exhibit
maximum impedance at the resonant frequency. Above or below the
resonant frequency, the network appears as a capacitive or inductive
reactance, respectively. When this type of network is connected across
the input of a tube or transistor amplifier, only the resonant-frequency
signals are allowed to be amplified. Signals above or below the reso-
nant frequency are shunted to ground.
The resonant frequency for either the series or parallel LC network
can be computed by the following equation:
fr  (Eq. 4.26)
where
fr is the resonant frequency in hertz
π is the constant pi (3.1416)
L is the inductance in henrys
C is the capacitance in farads
1
2πLC
C L
Impedance ohms
Bandwidth
Inductive
reactance
Resonant frequency, fr
Capacitor reactance
f1 f2
Frequency
The parallel resonant LC circuit.
F I G U R E 4 . 3 2
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 131
The Q of resonant circuits
The Q of a series or parallel resonant circuit is defined as the figure
of merit or quality factor for that particular circuit. In general, the Q
of a circuit describes the selectivity or sharpness of the response
curve for a resonant circuit. A high Q means that the circuit has a
narrow selectivity with a corresponding low bandwidth factor. The
bandwidth of the parallel LC network in Fig. 4.32 is indicated by the
frequencies f1 and f2 . Actually, the bandwidth for this circuit is equal
to f2 – f1 . Frequencies f1 and f2 are the points where the response of the
parallel LC network drops to 0.707 of the maximum response at the
resonant frequency, fr .
The Q of an inductor is equal to the ratio of the inductive reactance
to the effective resistance of the coil. For example, a coil wound with
a large size of wire would exhibit very little dc resistance. Accord-
ingly, the Q of this coil would be much higher than a similar coil con-
structed with smaller size wire. A smaller dc resistance in the coil
winding means that the coil will dissipate less energy as heat.
The capacitor also can be described in terms of its Q. This is essen-
tially a ratio of the energy stored in the capacitor to the energy dissi-
pated as heat due to the effective resistance of the capacitor dielectric
losses. In most capacitors, the effective resistance values are in the
hundreds to thousands of megohms. Therefore, the capacitor will
exhibit an extremely high Q.
Power Relationships
The power associated with an electrical circuit, either ac or dc, is
defined as the rate at which work is being performed. For example, a
current flowing in a resistor performs work in the sense that electrical
current is being converted to heat. A radio transmitter performs work
by generating RF energy that can be fed into an antenna, thereby creat-
ing electromagnetic waves.
The basic unit of electrical power is the watt. In radio communica-
tions, power is often expressed in terms of:
1 microwatt  1 μW  0.000001 watt  1 × 10–6 watt
1 milliwatt  1 mW  0.001 watt  1 × 10–3 watt
132 CHAPTER FOUR
1 kilowatt  1 kW  1000 watts  1 × 103 watts
1 megawatt  1 MW  1,000,000 watts  1 × 106 watts
Electrical power can be converted to mechanical power. An electric
motor, for example, converts electricity into a rotating mechanical
motion. Mechanical power is expressed in units of horsepower. The
relationship between horsepower and the watt is:
1 horsepower  746 watts
Power in a dc circuit
The power delivered to a resistive load by a direct-current source is
determined by the voltage across the load times the current through
the resistive load, or:
P  VI (Eq. 4.27)
where
P is the power in watts
V is the voltage in volts across the load
I is the current in amperes through the load
Ohm’s law can be applied to develop two additional power equa-
tions. These equations are sometimes very useful when computing the
power in a dc circuit.
P  watts (Eq. 4.28)
P  I2R watts (Eq. 4.29)
where
R is the resistance of the load in ohms
Figure 4.33 illustrates three examples for computing dc power.
Power in an ac circuit
Calculations involving power delivered to an ac circuit are more com-
plex than dc power calculations. The resistive elements in an ac cir-
cuit dissipate power in the form of heat. This is known as the real
power delivered to the ac circuit. This power is usually computed
using Equation 4-29, above.
The energy absorbed by the capacitive and inductive components
V 2
R
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGENTISM 133
of an ac circuit is temporarily stored and is returned to the circuit dur-
ing a later portion of each cycle. This is known as reactive power.
The total power delivered to an ac circuit, referred to as apparent
power, consists of the real power consumed by the resistive elements
and the reactive power absorbed (but not dissipated) by the reactive
M
V B
24 V
dc
motor
I = 2 A
Power:
P = V1 = 24   2 = 48 watts
A
B
12 Vdc
power
supply
RL
500
ohms
Power:
P = V 2
R
122
500
= = 0.29 watt
I = 12 mA
R L
24 K
ohms
Power:
P = I2 R = (0.012)2( 24,000) = 3.46 watts
C
Typical dc power computations. (A) Power delivered to a dc motor. (B) Power delivered
to a resistor. (C) Current through a resistor dissipates power.
F I G U R E 4 . 3 3
134 CHAPTER FOUR
elements. Apparent power, which is defined as the product of the cur-
rent through the circuit and the voltage impressed across the circuit, is
expressed in volt-amperes instead of watts.
Pa  VI (Eq. 4.30)
where
Pa is the apparent power in volt-amperes
Maximum power transfer
Maximum power is transferred to a load when the internal resistance
(or impedance) of the power is equal to the load resistance (or imped-
ance). This condition is valid for both ac and dc circuits.
Tubes and semiconductor devices form the basis for all electronic cir-
cuits involving rectification, amplification, oscillation, digital, and
other related functions. Tubes (such as triodes and pentodes) and tran-
sistors are called active devices because they are amplifying devices
capable of boosting very weak signals to high-level amplitudes. For
example, audio amplifiers can be used to amplify low-level audio sig-
nals from microphones or phonograph pick-up devices, to high signal
levels capable of driving loudspeakers. Radio frequency amplifiers (RF
amplifiers) are used in radio receivers to amplify extremely weak RF sig-
nals (in the microvolt range) from an antenna for subsequent signal pro-
cessing and ultimate conversion to audio signals for driving speakers or
headphones.
The vacuum tube, once the mighty workhorse in radio communica-
tions, has been relegated to the back seat by the smaller, more efficient
transistor. Most all new radio equipment on today’s market employs
solid-state technology. Only a few specialized applications, such as
high-power final amplifiers in the range of 1000 watts and above still
continue to use vacuum tubes.
The triode vacuum tube was invented by Lee De Forest in 1906.
One of the most important inventions of the twentieth century, the
vacuum tube spurred the development of radio communications,
Tubes and Semiconductors
5
135
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
136 CHAPTER FIVE
radar, television, space-age electronics, computers, and the list
goes on.
The present investment in vacuum tube electronic equipments,
particularly amateur radios, is enormous. For example, vacuum tube
HF transceivers will continue to give excellent service for years to
come. You can usually find some of these old, reliable ham radios at
local swap-fests and amateur radio conventions. Also, many major
electronic companies continue to manufacture quality HF “1 kilowatt
final power amplifiers” using rugged power tubes. The FCC requires
that all amateur radio operators develop a working knowledge of vac-
uum tubes and includes questions about this subject on all amateur
examinations. Some introductory material on vacuum tubes is pro-
vided here to help you pass the FCC examinations as well as to set up
and operate vacuum tube ham radios. Also, from time to time, you will
find some interesting construction articles involving home-built vac-
uum tube transmitters and receivers in amateur radio magazines such
as CQ, QST, and 73.
Like the vacuum tube, the invention of the transistor in the late
1940s and the integrated circuit in the late 1950s produced a major
impact on all fields of electronics. Although the first semiconductor
devices (crystal detectors using silicon or carborundum) were
invented about 1906, scientists at that time could not explain the the-
ory behind the crystal rectifier. The major breakthrough came in
1947 when scientists at the Bell Telephone Laboratories developed
the present-day semiconductor theory. This immediately led to the
fabrication of the transistor, the first solid-state amplifying device;
junction diodes; and thyristors. The disadvantages of the vacuum
tube—fragility, bulkiness, requiring high-voltage power supplies,
and use of filaments that require warm-up time and excessive
amounts of power—are eliminated by the rugged and compact tran-
sistor.
Let’s examine the tube and semiconductor devices in more detail.
You won’t need all this theory and practical information for the Tech-
nician Class examinations; only one question on vacuum tubes is
included in these examinations. However, a good background on tubes
and semiconductors will help you understand the operation of your
amateur radio equipment as well as prepare you for upgrade to higher
class amateur licenses.
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 137
Definitions
Semiconductor A class of materials that are neither good conduc-
tors nor good insulators of electricity. These materials, such as germa-
nium and silicon, possess relatively few free electrons for conducting
electrical current. In their pure form, semiconductors have little use in
electronic applications.
PN junction diode The pn junction diode, a two-terminal semi-
conductor device, is the simplest form of semiconductor used in elec-
tronics. This device consists of two tiny blocks of semiconductor
material referred to as n-type and p-type. These two blocks are, in
effect, joined together as one continuous block with leads connected to
each end. The pn junction diode allows current to flow easily in one
direction but literally blocks current flow in the opposite direction.
The two leads or terminals of the pn junction diode are referred to as
the anode and cathode. A pn junction diode can be constructed from
either germanium or silicon. PN junction diodes are used as rectifiers
in power supplies, detectors in radio receivers, and in other applica-
tions where rectification action is required.
Zener diode The zener diode, a two-terminal device, uses the
reverse-voltage characteristics of a pn junction to cause a voltage
breakdown that results in a high current through the diode. This
action produces a constant voltage drop across the diode and exhibits
voltage-regulating characteristics. Zener diodes are extremely useful
as voltage regulators in power supplies.
Bipolar transistor The bipolar transistor consists of three layers of
n-type and p-type semiconductor material arranged either in a npn or
pnp configuration. The three leads from the npn or pnp transistor are
called the emitter, base, and collector. The bipolar transistor is a cur-
rent-amplifying device and is used in amplifier, oscillator, and other
types of electronic circuits.
Field-effect transistor Field-effect transistors, or FETs, are con-
structed from various layers of n-type and p-type semiconductor mate-
rials. FETs are available in two general types: the junction, field-effect
transistor (JFET), and the insulated-gate field-effect transistor (IGFET).
Sometimes the IGFET is referred to as a metal-oxide semiconductor
field-effect transistor, or MOSFET. The FET transistor is a voltage-
amplifying device, and as such possesses a very high input resistance.
138 CHAPTER FIVE
FETs are useful in amplifier, oscillator, and other types of electronic
circuits where an active device is required.
Vacuum tube The vacuum or electron tube is a device that con-
sists of a number of electrodes mounted in an evacuated enclosure of
glass or metal. The vacuum tube employs a controlled flow of electron
current to perform functions such as rectification or amplification.
A vacuum tube can contain one or more of the following electrodes
or elements:
 Cathode The cathode produces a stream of electrons that are
directed towards the anode electrode. In most tubes, the cathode
is heated indirectly, resulting in thermionic emission of elec-
trons.
 Anode The anode, or plate, is the electrode to which the stream
of electrons flow.
 Grid A grid is an electrode normally placed between the cath-
ode and plate to control the flow of electrons. The grid has one or
more openings to permit passage of the electrons. A vacuum tube
can use one or more grids for controlling the flow of electrons.
The grids are called control, screen, suppressor or space-charge,
depending on the function to be performed.
Diode The diode is the simplest form of a vacuum tube and con-
sists of two electrodes, a cathode and plate. The word diode is
derived from di, meaning two, and ode, for electrode. A positive
potential, or voltage applied to the plate electrode, will attract the
electrons emitted from the cathode. This results in one-way flow of
current through the diode tube. Diodes are used primarily to rectify
ac signals.
Triode A major step in vacuum tube development, the triode pro-
vides a capability to amplify weak audio and radio-frequency signals.
The triode is a three-electrode device having a control grid positioned
between the cathode and plate. The grid controls the flow of electrons
to the plate. In addition to amplification, we can use the triode for
other important functions in electronic circuits, such as frequency
generation, conversion, modulation, and demodulation.
Pentode The pentode, a five-element vacuum tube, can be described
as the ideal amplifier in vacuum tube development. Scientists had
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 139
invented the tetrode, a four-element vacuum tube to overcome the limi-
tations of the triode. Although an improvement over the triode, the
tetrode still possessed limitations. The pentode, possessing a cathode,
control grid, screen grid, suppressor grid, and plate provides higher sig-
nal amplification and more stable operating characteristics.
Vacuum Tubes
Some typical vacuum tubes used in amateur radio and other electronic
equipment are illustrated in Fig. 5.1. The tube on the left is a heavy-duty
full-wave rectifier used in power supplies. The next two tubes are trans-
mitting power tubes and are rated at 35 and 15 watts, respectively. The
three tubes on the right are used in receiving or low-power applications
and are referred to as 9-pin miniature, subminiature, and nuvistor types,
respectively. (The nuvistor is the small metal tube below the miniature
tube.)
Thermionic Emission
Thermionic emission is produced when energy such as heat is applied
to a metallic material. For example, if we cause a sufficiently high
electrical current to flow through a wire, the heat produced in the wire
will cause a cloud of free electrons to be emitted from the surface of
the wire.
Thermionic emission is caused by the acceleration of electrons
within a material due to increased energy. When the energy imparted
to the electrons reaches a given level, the electrons will break away
Typical receiving and transmitting vacuum tubes.
F I G U R E 5 . 1
140 CHAPTER FIVE
from the surface of the material, forming a cloud of free electrons.
Unless influenced by an external force, such as an electric field, the
free electrons will be attracted back to the surface of the material while
other electrons are being emitted into the cloud. For a given material
and a given temperature, the number of free electrons contained in the
cloud will remain relatively constant.
As shown in Fig. 5.2A, the cathode within a vacuum tube pro-
duces a cloud of free electrons by either direct or indirect heating
methods. Once produced, the cloud of free electrons can be made to
flow in a specified direction to other electrodes within the tube, per-
forming functions such as rectification and amplification. Each par-
ticular type of vacuum tube requires a specific heater voltage and
current. Heater voltage values range from about 1.4 volts for battery-
operated equipment and 6.3 volts to 117 volts for ac-operated equip-
ments. Current requirements range from tens to hundreds of
milliamperes for receiving tubes to several amperes for high-power
transmitting tubes. A vacuum tube handbook or The ARRL Hand-
book will provide specific information on the voltage and current
requirements for each tube’s heater, as well as other tube operating
characteristics. Either ac or dc voltage can be used to power the
Pictorial representation and schematic symbols for directly and indirectly heated cath-
odes. (A) Directly heated cathode. (B) Indirectly heated cathode.
Tube
envelope
Cloud of
electrons
Filament
Support
wires

Filament
Filament
leads
To cathode
connection
Schematic
symbol
A battery
A B
Indirectly
heated
cathode
Cloud of
electrons

A battery
To cathode
connection
Cathode
Heater
Heater and
cathode wires
Schematic
symbol
F I G U R E 5 . 2
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 141
heater in most vacuum tubes—the indirectly heated cathode using
mostly ac power, and directly heated cathode using either ac or dc
power.
General Types of Vacuum Tubes
Many types of vacuum tubes have been developed over the past sixty
years. Specific types used in amateur radio equipment include the
diode, triode, tetrode, pentode, and cathode ray tube or CRT. Table 5.1
provides a summary of these tubes, their applications and commonly
used symbols.
Diodes
The diode is a simple two-electrode tube containing a cathode and
plate. The heater cathode emits a cloud of free electrons that possess
negative charges. If the plate voltage of the diode is made positive
with respect to the cathode, the free electrons are attracted to the
plate, resulting in a flow of electrical current. Figure 5.3A provides a
test circuit that illustrates the action of a diode in a dc circuit. An
analysis of this circuit, as well as the following ac rectification circuit,
will provide you with an insight into the theory of the diode tube as
well as troubleshooting techniques.
The 6AL5 used in this test circuit is a twin diode installed in a 7-
pin miniature glass envelope. Only one of the diode sections (Pins 1
and 7) is used in this circuit. Figure 5.3B shows the basing diagram for
the electrical connections within the tube. Basing diagrams are usually
referenced from the bottom view of the tube.
Each diode section in the 6AL5 can be used independently of the
other; there are no electrical connections between the two sections.
Many multipurpose tubes contain two or more independent sections
such as diode-triode, triode-triode, or triode-pentode. The 6AL5 has a
common heater for the two diodes, which requires 6.3 volts (ac or dc) at
0.3 ampere. Note that the 6AL5 in Fig. 5.3A is connected to a 6-volt bat-
tery. There is no electrical connection between the heater and cathodes.
If we set switch S1 to position A, the potential on the plate elec-
trode is zero volts. As a result, none of the electrons being emitted by
the cathode will be attracted to the plate. To verify that no current is
142 CHAPTER FIVE
flowing in the plate circuit, you can measure the voltage across the
load resistor R1 with a dc voltmeter. A zero voltage indicates no volt-
age drop; thus, no current through the resistor.
When we move switch S1 to position B, a positive voltage potential
is placed on the plate and free electrons will flow to the plate. The
quantity of electrons contained in this flow to the plate depends on
several factors, including the number of electrons being emitted from
the cathode and the amplitude of the positive potential placed on the
No. of
elements
Tube
type
Major
applications Symbol
Diode
Triode
Tetrode
Pentode
Two:
Cathode
Plate
Three:
Cathode
Control grid
Plate
Four:
Cathode
Control grid
Screen grid
Plate
Five:
Cathode
Control grid
Screen grid
Suppressor grid
Plate
1. RF Detector and demodulator
2. ac Rectifier
3. Peak detector and pulse
shaping circuit
1. Amplifier
2. Oscillator
3. Modulator
4. Mixer
1. Improved amplifier
(More stable)
2. Oscillator
3. Modulator
4. Mixer
1. Improved amplifier (More
stable and higher gain)
2. Oscillator
3. Modulator
4. Mixer
} Filament
(Heater)
Cathode
Plate
} Filament
Cathode
Plate
Control
grid
} Filament
Cathode
Plate
Control
grid
Screen
grid
}
Filament
Cathode
Plate
Control
grid
Suppressor
grid
Screen
grid
Table 5.1 Types of Vacuum Tubes Used in Amateur Radio Equipment
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 143
plate. Again, we can use a dc voltmeter to check for the presence of
current and also the magnitude of this current. Connect the voltmeter
across resistor R1 and determine the voltage value. Using Ohm’s law,
we can find the actual plate current (amperes) by dividing the plate
voltage (volts) by the resistance (ohms) of R1. An alternate method for
finding the plate current is to break the circuit at the plate terminal
and connect a dc ammeter. However, you have to physically break the
conductor to use the ammeter method.
Moving switch S1 to position C results in making the plate negative
with respect to the cathode. This negative potential repels the nega-
tively charged electrons, prohibiting any current flow within the
diode.
The diode as an ac rectifier
The great utility of the diode is its ability to conduct current in only one
direction. Thus we can use a diode to change ac current into dc current.
This process is known as rectification. Figure 5.4 illustrates how a diode
rectifies an ac current. The waveform for the ac input signal is shown at
the top of Fig. 5.4B. This signal varies from +5 volts peak to –5 volts peak
amplitude. Because the diode conducts in only one direction, only the
positive portion of the ac waveform is conducted by the diode. As a
Diode demonstration circuit using the 6AL5 twin diode vacuum tube. (A) Electron flow
in a diode. (B) 6AL5 base connections.
1
2
3
4 5
6
7
6AL5
Twin diode
Basing diagram
V1
SwitchC
B
A
R1
1/2-6AL5
Plate
element
Cathode
element
Electron flow
only when plate
is positive
Heater
A battery
1 3 4
7

VBS


S1
BA
F I G U R E 5 . 3
144 CHAPTER FIVE
result, a positive voltage is developed across load resistor R1. The wave-
form of the rectified signal is shown at the bottom of Fig. 5.4B. In practi-
cal circuits, the frequency of the ac signal can vary from power-line
frequencies of 60 Hz to radio frequencies in the hundreds of MHz.
In some circuits, diodes are used to demodulate signals at RF or IF fre-
quencies. Demodulation is a form of rectification where the modulating
signal, such as voice or tones, is separated from the carrier frequency.
Triodes
The triode, a three-electrode tube, has a control grid positioned between
the cathode and the plate. The purpose of this control grid is to control
the flow of electrons from the cathode to the plate. The addition of the
control grid to the vacuum tube greatly enhanced the capabilities of the
tube and revolutionized the electronics field. For the first time, signals,
such as audio and RF could be amplified. Electronic oscillators, modula-
tors, and other specialized circuits made possible the design and fabrica-
tion of sensitive radio receivers, stable high-power transmitters, and a
host of other equipment.
The control grid, sometimes simply referred to as the grid, usually
consists of a fine wire that is wound on insulated supports and sur-
Basic diode rectifier circuit and waveforms. (A) Diode rectifier circuit. (B) Input and
output voltage waveforms.

ac
signal
source
10 volts
peak-to-peak
R1 V1
Diode
Input signal from ac source
Rectified signal, V1
5 V
0 V
5 V
5 V
0 V
5 V
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 4
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 145
rounds the cathode. This wire can be wound in the form of a helix or
a ladder type of construction. The spacing between the wire is large
compared to the size of the wire. This allows most of the electrons
from the cathode to flow unobstructed to the plate.
Dimensions, shapes, and spacing of the three electrodes used in tri-
odes vary in relation to the intended applications. In some instances,
two or three triodes are installed inside of one envelope with inde-
pendent operation of each triode section. Figure 5.5A illustrates the
basic construction used in triodes. The physical supports for the elec-
trodes are not shown. Triodes, like diodes, can have either directly or
indirectly heated cathodes. Figure 5.5B shows the symbols for typical
triode tubes.
How triodes work
The operation of a triode is based primarily on the polarity and mag-
nitude of the voltage impressed on the control grid. A positive voltage
potential on the grid attracts the negatively charged free electrons,
causing more of them to be accelerated towards the plate electrode.
The triode vacuum tube. (A) Cutaway view of triode tube. (B) Symbols used for triode
tubes.
Plate pin
Heater pins
Grid pin
Cathode pin
Cathode
structure
Control
grid
Plate
structure
Filament
or heater
7-Pin miniature
glass envelope Plate
Grid
Filament
Directly heated
cathode triode
Heater
Plate
Grid
Cathode
Undirectly heated
cathode triode
Grid No. 1 Grid No. 2
Plate No. 1 Plate No. 2
Cathode No. 1 Cathode No. 2
Common heater
connections
Twin-triode
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 5
146 CHAPTER FIVE
The result is an increased current flow through the tube’s plate circuit.
Alternately, a negative voltage potential on the grid repels the free
electrons, causing many of them to be returned to the cathode’s sur-
face. Thus the resulting current flow from cathode to plate is reduced
or even cut off entirely.
This grid voltage can be either ac or dc. dc voltages are used for our
description of the operation of this tube. Figure 5.6 illustrates three con-
ditions for a triode. You can use a dc voltmeter to verify these operating
conditions. dc voltage readings showing grid-to-ground and plate-to-
ground voltage differences can help you troubleshoot defective tube cir-
cuits in your receiver or transmitter. Again, be extremely careful in
making such measurements; you can experience severe or fatal electrical
shock. Also, you might destroy your dc voltmeter if it is not switched to
the proper function and voltage range.
With no voltage applied to the grid, the triode acts like a diode. The
current flow between the cathode and plate depends on the polarity
The basic action of a triode. (A) Zero grid voltage. (B) Negative grid voltage. (C) Posi-
tive grid voltage.
A I = 5 mA
Grid shorted
to cathode
A
VBB
VBB
I = 0 mA
VGG
A
V BB
I = 25 mA
VGG
A
C
B
  


F I G U R E 5 . 6
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 147
and amplitude of the plate voltage. Because the grid is now at a zero
voltage potential, it has virtually no effect on the negatively charged
electrons being emitted by the cathode.
When a negative voltage is applied to the grid, a negative electro-
static field is created between the grid and cathode. This negative field
opposes or repels the electrons being emitted by the cathode. As a
result, fewer electrons are able to pass through the grid and reach the
plate.
As the negative potential of the grid is increased, the plate current
is eventually reduced to zero. This condition is known as cutoff, and
the amplitude of the grid voltage necessary to cause this state is
referred to as the cutoff voltage.
A positive grid voltage causes an increase in plate current. This is due
to the positive electrostatic field around the grid that attracts the electrons
and accelerates them toward the plate. If the positive voltage on the grid
is increased beyond a given amplitude, all electrons being emitted by the
cathode will flow to the plate. No further increase in plate current is pos-
sible. This condition is known as saturation. In normal receiving-tube
applications, saturation does not exist because the grid voltage is not dri-
ven to excessive positive levels. Most triode tube circuits use a bias or
fixed dc grid voltage to establish a plate current level between the tube’s
cut-off and saturation levels.
The circuits in Fig. 5.6 do not show the filament or heater power
supplies that heat the cathode. All subsequent symbols for vacuum
tubes will assume that the filaments or heaters are connected to a
power source unless it is pertinent to show these connections. You will
find most diagrams of radio and electronic equipment do not show the
filament or heater connections with the tube symbols. All of the fila-
ment or heater connections are normally given in a separate section of
the schematic diagram that is associated with the power supply.
Triode amplification action
The great utility of the triode is that it provides an amplification
action. A small change of grid voltage, representing an input signal,
produces a much larger change of voltage in the output plate circuit.
Thus, the triode serves primarily as a voltage amplifier. Figure 5.7 shows
a simplified triode circuit that can be used as an audio amplifier for
speech or music applications. This circuit uses a fixed bias supply of –4
148 CHAPTER FIVE
volts and a plate supply voltage of +250 volts. Capacitors C1 and C2 iso-
late the signal input and output connections from the tube’s dc voltages.
Using an oscilloscope to measure the input and output peak-to-peak sig-
nal levels, we can determine the voltage gain of this or other similar
amplifiers. The voltage gain or amplification for this circuit is 40/4, or
10. Called a common-cathode configuration, this amplifier inverts the
output signal. That is, the output is 180 degrees out of phase with the
input signal.
Limitations of triodes
The main limitation of the triode tube is that of interelectrode capac-
itance, especially the capacitance between the control grid and the
plate. When we use the triode as an amplifier in circuits where the
frequency of operation is high, the grid plate capacitance provides a
feedback path. This feedback effect results in unstable operation
and may cause the amplifier to oscillate. At audio frequencies, the
grid-plate capacitance is negligible and, in most cases, this limita-
tion can be ignored. However, at intermediate frequencies (IF) and
radio frequencies (RF), the grid-plate capacitance of a triode must be
considered in any design of amplifier circuits. For example, neutral-
The triode amplifier circuit.
2 V
2 V
20 V
20 V
Input signal
4 volts peak-to-peak
Output signal
40 volts
peak-to-peak
V1
Triode
C1
C2
R1
1 megohm
VCC
4 V 250 V
R2
5000
VBB
Output
 
F I G U R E 5 . 7
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 149
izing capacitors are employed with high-power transmitting triodes
to balance out the effects of the interelectrode capacitances. Triodes
are seldom used as IF or RF amplifiers.
Another major limitation of the triode is that it does not satisfy all
the amplifying or gain requirements needed in receivers, transmitters,
and other electronic equipment. For example, signal levels in the high-
frequency spectrum might be on the order of a few microvolts at the
antenna terminals. Triode amplifiers typically provide a gain of 5 to
20. Thus, many triodes would be required to amplify these signals to
sufficient level for driving headphones or loudspeakers.
Tetrodes and Pentodes
Limitations of triodes led to the development of tetrodes, pentodes,
and related types of vacuum tubes. These tubes have very little grid-
plate interelectrode capacitance and they possess high gain character-
istics. Tetrode and pentode symbols are given in Fig. 5.8.
The tetrode
The grid-plate interelectrode capacitance of the triode can be reduced
to an insignificant value by adding a fourth electrode, called the screen
grid, between the grid and plate. Having four electrodes, this tube is
designated as a tetrode. The screen grid, like the control grid, does not
materially interfere with the flow of electrons from the cathode to the
Symbols for the tetrode and pentode. (A) Tetrode. (B) Pentode.
Plate
Control
grid
Screen
grid
Cathode
Heater
Suppressor
grid
Plate
Control
grid
Screen
grid
Heater
Cathode
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 8
150 CHAPTER FIVE
plate because of the wide spacing of the screen-grid wires. Figure 5.9
shows a basic tetrode amplifier circuit.
Unlike the control grid, the screen grid is operated at a high posi-
tive potential. This screen-grid voltage, normally lower than the plate
voltage, produces another desirable advantage over the triode. The
plate current is independent of plate voltage because the screen grid
supplies a positive potential that pulls the electrons from the cathode
to the plate. As long as the plate voltage is higher than the screen volt-
age, the plate current in the tube depends primarily on the screen-grid
voltage and very little on the plate voltage. This action of the tetrode
results in a higher amplification factor and increases plate resistance
as compared to the triode.
Limitations of the tetrode
Although the tetrode is a considerable improvement over the triode,
secondary emission limits the performance of this tube. Secondary
emission of electrons occurs when high-velocity electrons from the
cathode strike the metallic plate surface. During this process, several
secondary electrons might be knocked free from the plate by each
high-velocity electron striking the plate. As long as the plate is more
positive than the screen grid, these secondary electrons will be
attracted back to the plate. However, if the plate voltage drops below
the screen voltage due to a high input signal, the secondary electrons
will be attracted to the screen grid. The net result is that the amplifi-
Basic tetrode amplifier circuit.
Screen grid
Input
source
signal
VCC VBB
Output load
resistor
R1
 
F I G U R E 5 . 9
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 151
cation of the tube is decreased and the output signal is distorted.
Tetrodes are used primarily as power transmitting tubes in many
amateur transmitters. The 6146 and the 2E26 are representative of
medium-power tetrode transmitting tubes.
The pentode
The pentode, a five-electrode tube, has a suppressor grid placed
between the screen grid and plate electrode. In most pentodes, the
suppressor grid is internally connected to the cathode. Thus, the sup-
pressor grid is essentially at a ground or slightly positive voltage
potential in most pentode circuits. Figure 5.10 shows a basic pentode
amplifier circuit.
The purpose of the suppressor grid is to eliminate the effects of sec-
ondary emission encountered in the tetrode. Because the suppressor
grid is at a negative potential with respect to the plate, it repels the sec-
ondary electrons and forces them back to the plate. The addition of the
suppressor grid further reduces the grid-plate interelectrode capaci-
tance. Therefore, the pentode can provide higher amplification with
reduced feedback instability problems when compared to the tetrode.
Voltage gain or amplification for pentode amplifiers can range up to
200 or more for receiving pentodes, such as the 6AG5, 6AU6, and the
6CB6. Pentodes are used almost exclusively in tube-type amateur
receivers and transceivers for RF and IF amplifiers.
Basic pentodeamplifier circuit.


Input
signal
source
Suppressor grid
internally connected
to cathode
Output load
resistor
R1
Screen grid
V CC VBB
F I G U R E 5 . 1 0
152 CHAPTER FIVE
The pentode as an amplifier
Figure 5.11 shows a 6AU6 pentode connected as a simple audio ampli-
fier. This amplifier has a frequency response of approximately 100 Hz
to 10 kHz, which is more than adequate for the voice frequency spec-
trum. Resistance-capacitance (RC) coupling is used in the input grid
and output plate circuits for coupling the low-level signal into the
amplifier and amplified output signal to the next stage. RC coupling
isolates the low-grid and high-plate dc voltage levels from the input and
output circuitry.
Another important aspect of this circuit is that of self-bias. This
eliminates the need for a separate grid voltage power supply. The self-
bias grid voltage is developed by the cathode resistor Rk, which devel-
ops a negative grid bias voltage. The voltage drop across the cathode
resistor due to the cathode current raises the cathode to a positive
potential with respect to the control grid. The cathode bypass capaci-
tor Ck across the cathode resistor bypasses the cathode AF signals to
ground, leaving a dc voltage drop across the cathode resistor. Thus, the
dc voltage on the grid electrode with respect to the cathode electrode
has a negative voltage potential, providing a grid voltage for the tube
Pentode amplifier circuit using the 6AU6 pentode vacuum tube.
CC
Input signal
V IN = 0.26 volts
peak-to-peak
GAU6
0.1F
14F
R G
220K RK
780
CK
0.1F
CG2
RG2
530 K
RP
220 K
300 V
0.01F
CC
RG
220 K
Output signal
V OUT = 53 volts
peak-to-peak
F I G U R E 5 . 1 1
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 153
circuit. This eliminates the need to use a separate negative power sup-
ply for grid biasing.
The 6AU6 pentode amplifier develops a voltage gain of approxi-
mately 200. This means that a 50-millivolt input signal to the control
grid will be amplified to 200 times its original level. The output signal
across the plate load resistor will be 200 times 50 millivolts (200 ×
0.05), or 10 volts in amplitude.
Specific vacuum tube operating specifications and design data for
triodes, tetrodes, and pentodes are available in many vacuum-tube
manuals and electronic handbooks such as The ARRL Handbook. This
type of information is useful in servicing tube-type amateur equipment.
Beam-power tubes
The beam-power tube combines the advantages of the tetrode and pen-
tode to provide for an increased power handling capability. This type
of tube has a cathode, control grid, screen grid, plate, and beam-form-
ing electrodes that concentrate beams of electrons to the plate.
Although the exterior appearance of beam-power tubes are identical to
other tubes, the tube electrodes are larger to accommodate the addi-
tional power developed by these tubes. Typical beam-power tubes
used in present-day amateur receivers and transceivers include the
6AQ5, 6DS5, and the 6V6.
Gas-filled tubes
The thyratron, a gas-filled triode tube, and the cold-cathode voltage-
regulator tube are representative of special-purpose tubes that employ
a gaseous atmosphere within the envelope of the tube. These tubes
conduct current due to the ionization of the gaseous atmosphere
inside of the tube.
The thyratron initially conducts current only when the control grid is
made positive. However, after the tube begins to conduct current, the
grid no longer has an effect on the flow of current. The plate voltage must
be reduced below the ionization potential of the gas in order to cut off the
current flow. The thyratron is used primarily to control ac current.
Cold-cathode voltage-regulator tubes are used to maintain constant
voltage drops for dc power supply applications. Sometimes referred to
as VR tubes, these tubes are available in a number of voltage ratings,
such as 75, 90, 105, and 150 volts.
154 CHAPTER FIVE
Cathode-ray tubes
Cathode-ray tubes are used to provide a visual display of electrical sig-
nals such as a sine-wave display on an oscilloscope or a video signal
on a television receiver. The electron gun within a cathode-ray tube
produces a thin beam of high-speed electrons that is directed toward a
fluorescent screen. When the electrons strike the fluorescent screen,
visible light is produced. This stream of electrons can be deflected by
electrostatic plates or by a magnetic field to provide the required dis-
play of information. Figure 5.12 shows the two types of cathode-ray
tubes currently in use. High voltages on the order of 1000 to 15,000
volts are required to produce the stream of high-speed electrons.
Diodes, Transistors, and
other Semiconductor devices
Semiconductor diodes and transistors have replaced virtually all types
of vacuum tubes used in modern amateur radio equipment. These
semiconductor devices operate on unique principles not encountered
in conventional conductors of electrical current, such as copper wire
or vacuum tubes. In contrast, pure semiconductor materials—primar-
ily germanium and silicon—possess relatively few free electrons avail-
able for conducting electrical current. The semiconductor material has
a crystaline atomic structure where virtually all of the electrons are
locked together in the outer orbit of each atom. Energy in the form of
heat liberates some electrons to support current flow. However, the
maximum current flow in a small block of semiconductor material is
too small to be of any practical use in electronic circuits.
The addition or doping of impurities within semiconductor materi-
als produces either excess numbers of free electrons or mobile holes,
depending on the type of material used as the impurity. Figure 5.13
shows a pure semiconductor material and semiconductor materials
that have been doped with certain impurities. Both germanium and
silicon semiconductor materials exhibit these characteristics. Both
types of modified semiconductor materials, referred to as n-type and
p-type semiconductors, can be made to produce usable amounts of
current flow. Figure 5.13 shows a relative comparison of pure and
modified semiconductor material.
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 155
Basic cathode-ray tubes. (A) Electrostatic deflection. (B) Electromagnetic deflection.
Heater
Cathode
Control grid
First accelerating
anode or focus anode
Second
accelerating
anode
Vertical
deflection
plates
Horizontal
deflection plates
Electron beam
Screen
Heater
Cathode
Control grid
Accelerating and
focus anode Deflection
coil
Electron beam
Screen
B
A
F I G U R E 5 . 1 2
156 CHAPTER FIVE
n-type semiconductor
If a tiny amount of doping material such as arsenic, antimony, or phos-
phorus is combined with the semiconductor material, the number of
free electrons is increased by a substantial amount. The n-type semi-
conductor material will support practical and usable amounts of elec-
trical current from microamperes to amperes. By itself, n-type silicon
is used to manufacture resistors; the amount of resistance is a function
of the level of concentration of impurities and the geometric shape of
the section of the n-type material. Tiny n-type silicon paths of resis-
tance are deposited in ICs to provide the required resistance for IC cir-
cuit operation.
p-type semiconductor
P-type semiconductor materials represent a relatively new concept in
electronics—“hole” current flow. When a semiconductor material
such as silicon is doped with aluminum, boron, or gallium, a substan-
tial number of mobile or free holes are created in the atomic crystalline
structure. Actually, the holes represent the absence of an electron in an
outer electron orbit in many semiconductor atoms. These holes, capa-
ble of carrying positive charges through the p-type silicon, can support
a practical current from microamperes to amperes.
How semiconductor devices are made
Semiconductor diodes and transistors are formed from alternate layers
of n-type and p-type semiconductor materials. For example, pn junc-
tion diodes consist of a layer of n-type and p-type material. pnp or npn
Pure and modified semiconduction material. (A) Pure semiconductor material. (B) n-
type material. (C) p-type material.
Free electrons Many free electrons Holes
A B C
F I G U R E 5 . 1 3
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 157
transistors can be fabricated by forming three tiny blocks of p-n-p or n-
p-n semiconductor materials, respectively. Figure 5.14 illustrates the
pn junction diode and pnp and npn transistor constructions, typical
schematic symbols, and representative packaging or cases. The type of
case is not always indicative of the device contained within the case.
The pn junction
The pn junction acts as a diode to provide rectification or one-way cur-
rent flow, similar to the diode vacuum tube. Two pn junctions are used
Construction, symbol, and typical case for a pn junction diode, a pnp and an npn transistor. (A) pn junction
diode. (B) pnp transistor. (C) npn transistor.
p n
Junction
Anode Cathode
Type of construction
Anode Cathode
Symbol
Band denotes
cathode
Typical case
p pn
Emitter
connection
Base
connection
Collector
connection Base
Collector
Emitter
Type of construction Symbol Typical case
n np
Base
connection
Emitter
connection
Collector
connection
Type of construction
Base
Collector
Emitter
Symbol Typical case
A
B
C
F I G U R E 5 . 1 4
158 CHAPTER FIVE
in “bipolar” pnp or npn transistors to provide amplification of small
input signals to large output signals similar to the triode vacuum tube.
This section concentrates on how the pn junction diode works.
A pn junction is formed when one half of a block of pure semiconduc-
tor material is doped with a trivalent impurity and the other half is doped
with a pentavalent impurity. The resulting pn junction creates an electro-
chemical force due to the excess holes in the p-type material and the
excess free electrons in the n-type material. This electrochemical force is
responsible for the operation of the pn junction diode and the transistor.
When the pn junction is formed, as shown in Fig. 5.15A, free elec-
trons from the n-type material drift across the junction and immedi-
ately combine with the numerous holes present in the p-type material.
Thus some atoms in the p-type material gain additional electrons and
exhibit a net negative charge. As a group, these atoms, or negative ions,
form a negative electric field adjacent to the junction.
The loss of free electrons by the n-type material in the vicinity of
the junction leaves some atoms with a net positive charge. These
atoms, or positive ions, form a positive electric field next to the junc-
tion. Each pair of positive and negative ions are referred to as a dipole
(not to be associated with the dipole antenna, covered in Chapter 10).
The formation of negative and positive electric fields at the junc-
tion are shown in Fig. 5.15B. This region is referred to as the depletion
zone. The depletion zone shown in Fig. 5.15B is not drawn to scale.
Actually, the depletion zone is very thin, virtually a few atoms thick.
The resulting electric field, or barrier potential, varies with the type of
semiconductor material being used. For example, the barrier potential
at room temperature is approximately 0.3 volt for a germanium pn
junction and approximately 0.7 volt for a silicon pn junction. These
values of barrier potential are the most useful in describing the action
of pn junction diodes and transistors. Note that the p-type material in
the pn junction diode is referred to as the anode and the n-type mate-
rial is referred to as the cathode. These designators represent a carry-
over from the vacuum tube era.
If the temperature of the pn junction is increased, the barrier poten-
tial is decreased by a slight amount due to the increased number of
electron-hole pairs, or dipoles. Temperature effects in semiconductor
materials must be taken into account when designing solid-state elec-
tronic circuits.
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 159
The pn junction described in the previous section is used as pn
junction diodes. Figure 5.16 shows the schematic symbol and several
case outlines used to house these diodes. These case outlines repre-
sent a general cross section of the numerous types of diodes available
on the commercial market. Semiconductor handbooks should be con-
sulted for specific technical information on particular diodes. The
The pn junction diode. (A) Initial condition when a pn junction diode is formed.
(B) Final condition of a pn junction diode after electric field is stabilized.
Excess holes
p-type
semiconductor
pn-junction
n-type
semiconductor
Excess
electrons





Depletion
zone
p-type
semiconductor
Excess holes
Electrons entering this area
combine with positive ions,
producing a net negative
charge.
Electrons leaving this area
produces a net positive charge.
Anode terminal Cathode terminal
Excess
electrons
n-type
semiconductor
B
A
F I G U R E 5 . 1 5
160 CHAPTER FIVE
diodes in Fig. 5.16B are low-power or sig-
nal diodes. These types of diodes are used
in RF detector, demodulator, and switch-
ing circuits. The miniature rectifier or
power diodes shown in Fig. 5.16C are
commonly used in low-power applica-
tions involving current up to about 1
ampere. Such diodes can be used in ac
power supplies involving receivers and
low-power transmitters. The high-power
rectifier diodes shown in Fig. 5.16D will
conduct current levels up to 10 amperes or
more with peak inverse voltage ratings of
50 to 600 volts depending on the type.
These high-power rectifiers are used in the
power supplies of high-power amateur
radio transmitters.
The pn junction diodes are available in
many sizes and case types. The basic pn
junction diode is used as a rectifier, either in high-current, low-fre-
quency rectification circuits or in low-current, high-frequency, and
high-speed switching circuits. Power rectifier diodes are generally
larger, containing a larger junction area with increased capacitance.
Due to this larger capacitance, these diodes are not suitable for high-
frequency or switching circuits. High-frequency signal diodes and
switching diodes used in digital circuits are physically smaller and
have less internal capacitance. Consequently, their current conducting
ability is less than the power diodes.
How diodes work
The operation of pn junction diodes can be explained in terms of for-
ward and reverse bias conditions. Forward biasing a diode simply
means that the anode terminal is connected to a positive voltage
potential, and the cathode terminal is connected to a negative voltage
potential. Figure 5.17A shows a battery connected across a diode in a
forward bias arrangement. (In practical circuits, this direct connection
will burn out the diode if the battery voltage is too high. A forward bias
voltage of several volts would destroy most diodes.)
Typical pn junction diodes. (A) Symbol for diode. (B)
Low-power or signal diodes. (C) Miniature rectifier or
power diodes. (D) High-power rectifier diodes.
Anode Cathode
Approximately
0.21 in (53mm)
Anode end Cathode end
A
C D
B
F I G U R E 5 . 1 6
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 161
When the voltage across the diode is greater than the barrier poten-
tial of the pn junction, a forward current flows in the diode. This cur-
rent flow is due to the electric field produced by the voltage across the
junction, which forces both free electrons and holes toward the junc-
tion. The barrier potential for a germanium pn junction is approxi-
mately 0.3 volt. When the voltage across the junction exceeds 0.3 volt,
this higher potential pushes free electrons and holes across the junc-
tion. Thus free electrons in the n-type material cross the junction and
drift toward the anode. At the same time, holes from the p-type mate-
rial cross the junction, drifting toward the cathode end. These actions
result in a current flow that is proportional to the applied voltage.
The movement of holes and free electrons toward the junction
reduces the size of the depletion zone. As the external battery voltage
is increased, the depletion zone becomes progressively smaller and is
eventually eliminated for all practical purposes.
Reverse bias
Reverse biasing a pn junction diode simply means making the cathode
more positive than the anode. Figure 5.17B shows a battery connected
Forward and reverse biasing a pn junction. (A) Forward-biased pn junction. (B) Reverse-
biased pn junction.

Holes Electrons
Electron
flow
Electron
flow
Battery







p-type
material
Moving
holes
Narrow
depletion
zone Moving
electrons
n-type
material




Wide
depletion
zone
Holes
p-type
material
n-type
material
Electrons
No hole or
electron movement
No current flow

Battery
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 1 7
162 CHAPTER FIVE
across the diode in a reverse bias arrangement. The reverse current in
this circuit is very small, practically zero.
The action of the reverse voltage places a positive potential at the
cathode terminal or n-type material of the diode. This potential
attracts the free electrons and causes them to drift toward the cathode
terminal. At the same time, holes in the p-type material drift toward
the anode terminal because they are attracted to the negative potential.
This increases the size of the depletion zone because the departing free
electrons and holes create more positive ions in the n-type material
and more negative ions in the p-type material, respectively. The deple-
tion zone expands to result in a barrier potential equal to the applied
reverse voltage. Thus, the current flow in the diode is virtually zero
due to equal and opposing voltages. Only a small leakage current is
present in the reverse biased diode. The pn junction acts as a one-way
switch, allowing current to flow in one direction, but restricting cur-
rent flow in the other direction.
Diode circuits
The pn junction diode serves as a rectifier, converting alternating
current to unidirectional or one-way current flow. The simplest
diode circuit is the half-wave rectifier, shown in Fig. 5.18. Input and
output voltage ratings of power transformers are normally given in
rms or effective voltage levels. However, the diode rectifies the peak
value of the voltage waveform and provides a pulsating dc output
Half-wave rectifier circuit.
169 V

0
169 V
Input
voltage
120 Vac
RMS
R
Input peak-to-peak
voltage
Power
transformer
Turns ratio
10:1
D
0 0
17 V
17 V
17 V
Secondary winding
peak-to-peak
voltage
Rectified output
peak voltage
F I G U R E 5 . 1 8
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 163
voltage level. The peak ac voltage is obtained by multiplying the rms
value by 1.414.
Two diodes can be connected to form a full-wave rectifier circuit
when the secondary winding of the transformer has a center tap. Fig-
ure 5.19 illustrates this type of full-wave rectifier circuit. The diodes
conduct on alternating half cycles of the ac waveform, each referenced
from the center tap of the secondary winding. Thus, only one-half of
the total peak-to-peak output voltage is used for each diode. Diode D1
conducts only when the ac voltage is positive, and diode D2 conducts
when the ac voltage is negative. The ground return is connected to the
center tap of the secondary winding. The current from either diode
flows through load resistor R in the same direction. Thus, the output
voltage is a varying dc voltage ranging from 0 to +8.5 volts. The pri-
mary disadvantage of the full-wave rectifier circuit is that the rectified
voltage peak is one half or less of the rated secondary voltage of the
transformer. The pulsating dc output of a full-wave rectifier has a fre-
quency that is twice the ac input frequency.
The pn junction diodes can be used as clipper diodes, eliminating
either the positive or negative half of the input ac signal. Figure 5.20
shows a positive clipper circuit. The diode is forward biased during
the positive half of the ac signal and conducts this part of the signal to
ground. The negative half of the ac signal is unaffected because the
diode is reverse biased and does not conduct. A negative clipper cir-
cuit is shown in Fig. 5.21.
Full-wave rectifier circuit.

120 Vac RMS
or 169 V peak
Input peak-to-peak
voltage source
169 V
 169 V
0
17 V
17 V
0
D1
D2
R0
8.5 V
Turns
ratio 10:1
F I G U R E 5 . 1 9
164 CHAPTER FIVE
Special-Purpose Diodes
The unique properties of the pn junction make possible the construc-
tion of special-purpose diodes that exhibit useful characteristics. By
varying the doping process and manufacturing techniques, special-
purpose diodes can be made to perform as voltage regulators, voltage-
controlled capacitors, and negative-resistance devices.
The zener diode
As noted earlier, ordinary pn junction diodes can be destroyed if they
are subjected to the reverse bias breakdown voltage. The zener diode is
a unique silicon pn junction diode designed to operate in the reverse
bias breakdown mode. By controlling the doping levels, zener diodes
can be manufactured for specific breakdown voltage levels from about
2 to 200 volts. The constant breakdown-voltage-level characteristic
exhibited by the zener diode provides an extremely useful voltage-reg-
ulating device.
The zener diode is heavily doped, which results in a very narrow
depletion zone. When a reverse bias voltage is applied to the diode,
Positive clipper circuit.
ac
generator D R Output
V
V Input ac voltage
waveform
V Clipped output
waveform
F I G U R E 5 . 2 0
Negative clipper circuit.
ac
generator D R Output
V
V Input ac voltage
waveform
V
F I G U R E 5 . 2 1
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 165
the intense electric field developed across the junction is sufficient to
dislodge valence or outer-orbit electrons in the material. These elec-
trons are free to flow across the junction, resulting in current flow.
This current flow must be kept within manufacturers’ limits by con-
necting current-limiting resistors in series with the external voltage
source.
Symbols for the zener diode are given in Fig. 5.22. A typical appli-
cation of the zener diode as a voltage regulator is shown in Fig. 5.23.
In this example, a 9-volt zener with a power dissipation of 3 watts is
used to provide a stable 9-volt source from a varying 11- to 14-volt
Common symbols used for zener diodes.
Cathode end
Anode end
Z
F I G U R E 5 . 2 2
Typical voltage regulator circuit using a zener diode.
9 Vdc
Vz

VS
RS
Unregulated
power supply
11-14 Vdc
Load
(transistor
radio)
9 Vdc 100 mA
F I G U R E 5 . 2 3
166 CHAPTER FIVE
power supply. This type of voltage regulator can be used to power a
transistor radio from the electrical system of an automobile. With the
engine running, the electrical system of the automobile can supply up
to 14 volts from the generator or alternator. When the engine is shut
down, the voltage drops to about 12 volts if the battery is charged.
Regardless of the varying voltage supplied by the system, the zener
regulating circuit maintains a constant 9-volt supply to the transistor.
The varactor diode
The varactor diode, or simply varactor, is a voltage-controlled, vari-
able-capacitance pn junction diode used for tuning radio-frequency
circuits to a desired resonant frequency. The varactor, a rugged, com-
pact semiconductor device, represents an important advance in elec-
tronic technology. It is replacing the bulky mechanical variable
capacitors used in radio communications equipments for the past
some 75 years. Unlike the variable capacitor, the varactor is not
affected by dust or moisture and can be remotely controlled. Symbols
for the varactor are given in Fig. 5.24.
The capacitance of the pn junction diode can be increased by special
doping processes. This increased capacitance, on the order of 10 to 60
picofarads, allows the varactor to be operated in the reverse biased
mode with negligible current flow. Figure 5.25 shows a typical circuit
application using the varactor to tune an LC tank circuit. Coil L1 and
capacitor C1 form a resonant tank circuit, which is tuned to frequencies
by the varactor diode. Capacitor C2 isolates the tank circuit from the dc
power supply. Radio frequency choke RFC prevents any RF coupling
between the tank circuit and the power
supply. The varactor diode is reverse biased
and draws essentially no current from the
power supply. The varactor diode can pro-
vide a wide variation in capacitance, allow-
ing for a considerable change in the
resonant frequency of the tank circuit.
Transistors
Transistors, like triode, tetrode, and pen-
tode tubes, have the ability to amplifyTwo common symbols used for varactor diodes.
F I G U R E 5 . 2 4
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 167
weak signals. Also, like tubes, transistors
are designed for varying power applica-
tions. Small-signal transistors are used for
amplifying weak or low amplitude signals
to power levels of about one watt or less.
Power transistors are designed to handle
power levels in excess of one watt. Figure
5.26 shows a group of typical transistors
used in amateur radio and other electronic
equipment. Transistors at the top of the
photograph are the small signal types and employ either metal or plas-
tic cases. Power transistors are shown at the bottom. For specific infor-
mation on transistor types and case information, transistor handbooks
are available at most electronic supply houses, such as Radio Shack.
Transistors fall into two general categories: bipolar (or junction)
transistors and field-effect transistors. Each class possesses unique
characteristics that are useful in various applications.
The bipolar transistor consists of three doped regions either in a
pnp or an npn arrangement. This creates two independent pn junc-
tions that govern the operational characteristics of these devices.
Either type of bipolar transistor can be constructed from germanium or
silicon semiconductor material.
Typical varactor tuning diode tuning circuit.
L1
Tuning
control
C1
C2
D1
R1 V
RFC
F I G U R E 5 . 2 5
Typical transistors used in amateur radio and other electronic equipment.
F I G U R E 5 . 2 6
168 CHAPTER FIVE
Bipolar transistors are current-operated devices, producing a large
change in output current for a small change in input current. There-
fore, the bipolar transistor has a low input resistance when compared
to the almost infinite input resistance of vacuum-tube circuits. Basic
amplifier circuits for the pnp and npn transistors are compared with
that of the triode vacuum tube in Fig. 5.27. The npn transistor circuit
is similar to the triode circuit in terms of power supply polarities. The
triode is connected as a common-cathode amplifier and the transistors
are connected as common-emitter amplifiers. The bias circuits, VCC for
the triode and VBB for the transistors, are shown in terms of separate
batteries to illustrate the potentials on each control element. However,
most tube and transistor circuits operate from a single power source
and the dc bias voltages are established by resistive networks.
The bipolar transistor is capable of providing high gain characteris-
tics. Current and voltage gain ranges between 50 to 200 for most small-
signal transistors. Some transistors will exhibit current gain as high as
1000. In terms of gain characteristics, the bipolar transistor is superior
to the triode and is comparable to the pentode.
Field-effect transistors, or FETs, are different from the bipolar tran-
sistor in that an electric field is used to control the flow of current
within the device. Thus, the FET is a voltage-operated device with an
input resistance that is virtually infinite. The characteristic operating
curves for the FET are similar to those of the pentode tube. However,
A comparison between a triode vacuum tube amplifier circuit and amplifier circuits uti-
lizing pnp and npn transistors. (A) A triode vacuum tube amplifier. (B) A pnp transis-
tor amplifier. (C) An npn transistor amplifier.
Input
Output
Input
Output
Input
Output
VBBVCC VBB VCC VBB VCC
     
BA C
F I G U R E 5 . 2 7
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 169
FETs do not possess the high gain characteristics exhibited by bipolar
transistors or pentodes.
Field-effect transistors are generally divided into two types: the
junction FET (or JFET), and the insulated-gate FET (or IGFET). Some-
times the IGFET is referred to as a metal-oxide semiconductor FET or
MOSFET. Symbols for the JFET and IGFET are given in Fig. 5.28.
Bipolar transistor construction
At first glance, the bipolar transistor might appear to be simply two pn
junction diodes connected back to back. However, each of the elements
(emitter, base, and collector) is carefully manufactured with different
specifications to obtain different characteristics. Figure 5.29 shows the
basic layout for an npn transistor. The n-type emitter is heavily doped,
producing many free electrons that can be emitted toward the base
region. The base is a very narrow layer of lightly doped p-type material
containing a small number of holes. Finally, the n-type collector, mod-
erately doped to produce a limited number of free electrons, is
designed to collect free electrons that drift across the base material
from the emitter. The collector is the largest element because it must
dissipate more heat than either the emitter or base elements.
npn transistor operation
Figure 5.30 shows the required biasing for the operation of npn tran-
sistors. The base-collector pn junction is reverse biased. Without the
Three common types of field-effect transistors. (A) n-channel JFET. (B) p-channel JFET.
(C) n-channel MOSFET.
Drain
Gate
Source
Gate
Drain
Source
Drain
Gate
Source
BA C
F I G U R E 5 . 2 8
170 CHAPTER FIVE
emitter circuit, the base-collector pn junction prevents any flow of cur-
rent. However, the emitter-base np junction is forward biased and this
causes a flow of free electrons toward the base region.
Most of the free electrons entering the base drift across the narrow
region and pass into the collector. Only a few of these free electrons
combine with the limited number of holes in the base region. This
Basic construction of an npn bipolar transistor.
Emitter
Base
Collector
pn-junctionHeavily doped n-type
semiconductor with many
free electrons
np-junction
Lightly doped p-type
semiconductor with few holes Modulately doped
n-type semiconductor
F I G U R E 5 . 2 9
Current flow in an npn transistor.
Free electrons
n p n
Emitter Collector
I E
RE
VEE VCC
IB
100%
5%
RC
IC
95%
 
Base
F I G U R E 5 . 3 0
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 171
results in a small current of about 5 percent or less of the total emitter
current. Thus, some 95 percent of the free electrons pass through the
base to the positive collector. This action is responsible for the ampli-
fying ability of the transistor.
pnp transistor operation
A pnp transistor operates in the same basic manner as an npn transis-
tor except that holes are emitted by the emitter instead of electrons.
Note in Fig. 5.31 that the polarities of the batteries are reversed when
compared to those for the npn transistor. The emitter-base pn junction
is forward biased, causing holes in the emitter to drift toward the base.
Most of these holes drift across the narrow region of the base and into
the collector. Some 5 percent or less of the holes crossing into the base
material combine with free electrons and produce a small base cur-
rent. Thus, 95 percent or more of the current produced by the emitter-
base pn junction flows through the base to the negative collector.
Common-base amplifying circuits
The npn and pnp transistors in Figs. 5.30 and 5.31 are connected in
the common-base configuration. This is one of the three basic circuits
applicable to transistors. The common-emitter and the common-col-
lector configurations are discussed later.
Current flow in a pnp transistor.
p n p
Emitter Collector
IE
RE
VEE VCC
IB
100%
5%
RC
IC
95%
 
Base
Many holes
F I G U R E 5 . 3 1
172 CHAPTER FIVE
The relationship between the emitter, base, and collector currents
is given by:
IE  IB IC (Eq. 5.1)
where
IE is the emitter current
IB is the base current
IC is the collector current
An important parameter or characteristic of the common-base con-
figuration is the current gain. This is referred to as alpha (α) and rep-
resents the ratio of collector current to emitter current, or:
α  (Eq. 5.2)
Because IC can never exceed IE the α of a transistor is always less
than one. The value of α will range from about 0.95 to 0.99, depending
on the gain characteristics of the transistor.
Figure 5.32 shows a basic pnp common-base amplifier circuit. The
signal from the ac generator is coupled to the emitter via a dc-blocking
capacitor, C1. The output signal is taken from the collector through the
dc-blocking capacitor, C2, and can be connected to a following stage
for additional amplification if required. The emitter-base pn junction
is forward biased by battery VBB. Emitter resistor RE is a current-limiting
resistor. Thus, battery VBB and resistor R E establish a dc operating cur-
rent before an ac input signal is applied to the amplifier.
IC
IE
A pnp common-base amplifier circuit.
C1 C2pnp
RE RL
re rc
V
V
Input signal
voltage
waveform
 
VEE VCC
V
V
Output signal
voltage waveform
Output
F I G U R E 5 . 3 2
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 173
The amplifying action of the common-base configuration is based on
the ac input signal varying the forward bias across the emitter-base pn
junction. This varying voltage produces a change in the current flowing
from the emitter toward the base region. As stated earlier, most of the cur-
rent flows through the narrow base region into the collector. Thus, the cur-
rent flowing into the collector circuit varies essentially the same as the
emitter current and produces an ac voltage drop across the load resistor, RL.
The ac output voltage developed across RL is large compared to the
ac input signal voltage. This is due to RL being many times the value of
the input resistance of the emitter-base circuit. The input resistance of
the common-base configuration, referred to as the emitter resistance
Re, is typically less than 100 ohms and can be as low as 10 ohms or
less. This is due to the fact that the emitter-base junction is forward
biased, presenting a low resistance. Conversely, the collector output
resistance is extremely high, on the order of 300 k to 500 k.
To provide a useful output from a common-base amplifier, such as
driving a subsequent stage of amplification, load resistor RL is typically
on the order of 2 k to 10 k. The voltage gain of the common-base con-
figuration can be approximated by:
AV  (Eq. 5.3)
where
AV is voltage gain
α is alpha or current gain
RL is the collector load resistance
R e is the emitter resistance
Example 1 Find the voltage gain of the circuit in Fig. 5.32 if the alpha of the
transistor is 0.98. The input emitter resistance is 25 ohms and the collector load
resistor is 2000 ohms.
Solution
Compute the voltage gain, AV, by substituting the given values in
Equation 5.3:
AV 

 78.4 (Answer)
0.98 × 2000
25
αRL
Re
αRL
Re
174 CHAPTER FIVE
The common-base configuration does not provide current gain
because the collector output current is always slightly less than the
input current in the emitter circuit. Due to this limitation and the
extremely low input resistance, the common-base configuration is not
widely used in solid-state circuits.
Common-emitter amplifier circuits
The common-emitter configuration is the most useful of the three
basic transistor circuits. Both npn and pnp common-emitter circuits
are illustrated in Fig. 5.33.
A dc base current, on the order of a few microamperes for small-sig-
nal transistors, flows in the forward-biased base-emitter pn junction.
Common-emitter amplifier configurations. (A) A pnp common-emitter amplifier. (B) An
npn common-emitter amplifier.
 
V
V
Input signal
voltage
waveform
C1 IB
RB
VBB VCC
rb
IE
rc
IC C2
RC
V
V
Output
Output signal
voltage waveform
 
V
V
Input signal
voltage
waveform
C1 IB
RB
VBB VCC
rb
IE
rc
IC C2
RC
V
V
Output
Output signal
voltage
waveform
B
A
F I G U R E 5 . 3 3
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 175
The collector current, on the order of a few milliamperes, flows in the
collector-emitter circuit.
The ac signal input to this amplifier is coupled to the base via a dc
blocking capacitor, C1. Battery VBB and base-current-limiting resistor RB
provide a dc operating base current. The ac input signal voltage varia-
tions produce a corresponding variation in the dc base-emitter current.
This action in turn varies the collector current, resulting in current
amplification.
Current gain in a common-emitter configuration is determined by
the ratio of change in collector current to change in base current.
This quantity is expressed as beta (β). In mathematical terms, beta is
given as:
β  (Eq. 5.4)
where
β is beta or current gain
IC is the change in collector current caused by the varying input
signal
IB is the change in base current caused by the varying input signal
The beta of most small-signal transistors will range from about 40
to 200, with some high-gain transistors having a beta of up to 1000.
For example, if a 10-microampere change in base current produces a
500-microampere change in collector current, the resulting beta is
500/10, or 50.
The base input resistance of common-emitter transistor circuits is
normally on the order of 500 to 5000 ohms. The collector output resis-
tance is about 50,000 ohms. These moderate input and output resis-
tances, along with high voltage and current gain, make the
common-emitter configuration a valuable circuit for solid-state design.
The voltage gain of the common-emitter configuration is compara-
ble to that of the common-base configuration—normally on the order
of 100 to 1000. This voltage gain along with high current gain pro-
duces a power gain of 10,000 or more for the common-emitter config-
uration. The phase of the amplified output signal produced by the
common-emitter amplifier is reversed when compared to the input
signal, i.e., as the ac input signal increases from zero to a positive
level, the ac output signal drops from zero to a negative level. This is
due to the increasing positive voltage on the base that causes the col-
IC
IB
176 CHAPTER FIVE
lector current to increase, thus decreasing the collector voltage. Con-
versely, an increasing negative voltage on the base reduces the collec-
tor current, causing the collector voltage to rise.
Common-emitter design considerations
Solid-state design is a complex and wide-ranging aspect of electronics
that includes many types of semiconductor devices and circuits. Many
excellent texts are available that cover practical and theoretical details
of this subject. Because space is not available in this handbook to
cover all aspects of solid-state design, a procedure for designing a sim-
ple common-emitter amplifier circuit is given here.
Most transistor circuits operate from a single common power
source. The simple npn amplifier in Fig. 5.34 uses a single 9-volt bat-
tery for both base-biasing and collector-supply requirements. The cur-
rent flowing in base-biasing resistor R B establishes a dc operating
current for a no-signal input condition.
A simple biasing method for a common-emitter circuit.
Input
4F
4F
C1
C2
RB
1.1 M
IB
VBE
VCE
Q1
2N3904 IC
VCC
RC
4500
9 Volts
IE
Output
F I G U R E 5 . 3 4
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 177
A 2N3904 npn silicon transistor is used in this circuit. The 2N3904,
similar to the Sylvania ECG123A or the Radio Shack RS-2030, is
designed for general-purpose amplifier and switching applications.
Applicable ratings for the 2N3904 transistor, available in most transis-
tor handbooks, are as follows:
The 2N3904 is capable of handling currents of up to 200 mA. How-
ever, for small-signal applications an IC of about 1 mA is recommended.
This smaller static or dc current will result in a higher input impedance
(or resistance) for the base-emitter circuit and ensure linear amplifica-
tion of small ac signals. Also, the small collector current results in very
little power dissipation within the transistor and minimizes power sup-
ply drain. For battery-powered applications, this latter advantage is all
important.
The dc collector-emitter voltage, VCE, is normally established as one-
half of the supply voltage, VCC. In this example, VCE will be equal to one-
half of 9 V, or 4.5 V. The value of RC can be calculated from the
following equation:
RC  ohms (Eq. 5.5)
VCC – VCE
IC
Maximum Voltage and Current Ratings
Collector-base voltage, VCB 60 V
Collector-emitter voltage, VCE 40 V
Base-emitter voltage, VBE 6 V
Collector current, IC 200 mA
Junction operating temperature 135° C
Small-Signal Characteristics
For IC 1 mA, VCE  10 V, and Signal Frequency 1 kHz:
Current gain (Beta) 100 to 400, Average  125
Input impedance 1 k to 4 k, Average  3.5 k
178 CHAPTER FIVE
Substituting the required values, R C is:
RC    4500 ohms
The base current, IB, is related to the collector current, IC, and the
beta of the transistor. Thus, IB can be calculated as follows. Because:
β  , then IB  (Eq. 5.6)
Substituting IC = 0.001A and β = 125 in Equation 5.6,
IB   0.000008 A or 8
A
The base resistor, RB, can now be calculated based on I B  8
A.
The base-emitter pn junction is forward biased, resulting in a voltage
drop of approximately 0.7 volt for silicon transistors. (If a germanium
transistor is used in this type of circuit, the base-emitter voltage, VBE,
is approximately 0.3 volt.) Therefore, if VCC is 9 volts and VBE is 0.7 volt,
the voltage drop across base resistor RB is 9 – 0.7 or 8.3 volts. The
equation for determining RB is:
R B  ohms (Eq. 5.7)
RB can now be calculated as follows:
RB    1,030,000 ohms ≅ 1.0 megohm
The values of dc blocking capacitors C1 and C2 are selected to pro-
vide a low-impedance path for the input and output signals. For exam-
ple, if the amplifier is designed for an audio frequency response from
200 Hz to 3 kHz, the capacitive reactance, XC, of each capacitor should
not exceed a given value over this frequency range. Because XC varies
inversely with frequency (remember, XC  1
⁄2 πfc), its value will be
greatest at the lower frequencies. A 4-μF capacitor will present an XC of
about 200 ohms at 200 Hz. Considering the input resistance (about
3500 ohms) and the output resistance (about 4500 ohms) for the tran-
sistor amplifier, the 200-ohm capacitive reactance of the blocking
capacitors will offer little opposition to the input and output signals.
8.3
0.000008
9 – 0.7
8 μA
VCC – VBE
IB
0.001
125
IC
β
IC
IB
9 – 4.5
0.001
VCC – VCE
IC
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 179
The preliminary design for the small-signal amplifier using the
2N3904 transistor is now complete and can be breadboarded for initial
testing. The current gain is approximately 125, based on the average
beta for this transistor. However, what happens if the 2N3904 transis-
tor obtained for this circuit has a different beta, say 300? This poses a
problem that is inherent in this design procedure.
Variations in transistor characteristics
Unlike vacuum tubes, the characteristics of transistors will vary dur-
ing manufacturing processes. For example, the common-emitter cur-
rent gain, or beta, for the 2N3904 transistor might range from about 100
to 400. If the previous circuit design was based on a beta of 125, a
2N3904 with a beta of 400 will not perform as expected in this circuit.
The increased current gain will result in a higher collector current,
lowering the desired collector-emitter voltage.
An experimental approach may be used to determine the optimum
value of the base resistor, R B. The value of R B is critical in controlling
the collector current. Thus, RB can be determined experimentally by
substituting a variable resistor in the circuit and varying the resistance
for the required collector-emitter voltage of 4.5 volts. A recommended
procedure for determining the proper value of base resistor RB is:
 With VCC (9 volts in this circuit) applied to the amplifier, measure
the value of VCE. If the measured value of VCE is within about 10
percent of the required value, the original calculations are ade-
quate and no changes are required. If the measured value of VCE is
not within 10 percent of the required value, that is, below 4 volts
or above 5 volts, the value of RB should be changed to obtain the
correct VCE.
 Figure 5.35 illustrates how a variable resistor network can be
temporarily installed in the base-biasing circuit (between points
A and B). Note that a fixed resistor is used along with the poten-
tiometer in order to prevent excessive base current. The total
range of this resistive network can be varied from 0.5 to 3.5
megohms.
 With 9 volts applied to the circuit, adjust the variable resistor
to obtain a V CE of 4.5 volts. Remove power from the circuit and
180 CHAPTER FIVE
measure the resistance of the temporary
network with an ohmmeter. A fixed resis-
tor of this approximate value can now be
connected permanently in the circuit in
place of the temporary network. This
completes the design and the amplifier
can be used for small-signal amplifica-
tion.
Voltage gain of common-emitter
amplifier circuits
Beta, the current gain for the circuit in
Fig. 5.34, was determined from manufac-
turers’ specifications. The voltage gain of
this amplifier is defined as the ratio of the
output signal voltage to the input signal
voltage, or:
Av  (Eq. 5.8)
where
Av is the voltage gain
Vout is the amplitude of the output signal
Vin is the amplitude of the input signal
The approximate voltage gain can be determined by the following
equations:
AV ≅ , or (Eq. 5.9)
Av ≅ β (Eq. 5.10)
where
ic is the change in collector current caused by the ac input signal
ib is the change in base current caused by the ac input signal
RC is the collector load resistor
β is the current gain
rb is the input base-emitter resistance of the transistor
Rc
rb
ic × R c
ib × rb
Vout
Vin
Experimental circuit for determining the value of Rg in
a simple biased common-emitter transistor amplifier.
R1
3 M
Potentiometer
R2
500 K
A
B
Q1
2N3904
R C
VCC
Notes:
RB = R1 R2
F I G U R E 5 . 3 5
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 181
Note that the current ratio, ic /ib, is the beta of the transistor. Some-
times the beta for a specific dc operating level, such as a specified col-
lector current of 1 mA, is termed the ac current gain or Ai.
The approximate voltage gain, A v, for the circuit in Fig. 5.34 is cal-
culated using a beta of 125, an input base-emitter resistance of 3.5 k,
and a 4.5-k collector load resistor, RC.
Av  β  125 ×  161
If a 10-millivolt, peak-to-peak signal is applied to the input of this
amplifier, the amplifier output signal will be 161 times 10 millivolts,
or 1.6 volts, peak-to-peak.
If the manufacturers’ specifications do not include the value of rb,
the base-emitter resistance, it can be approximated by the following
equation:
rb  ohms (Eq. 5.11)
The value of rb for the 2N3904 transistor with a collector current, IC,
of 1 mA is calculated as follows:
rb    3125 ohms
This compares favorably with the 3500 ohms specified by the man-
ufacturer.
This completes the design calculations for the small-signal ampli-
fier using the 2N3904 transistor. In general, this design is valid for
audio and low-frequency applications. When radio-frequency ampli-
fier circuit design is required, many factors must be taken into consid-
eration. For example, the frequency response of the transistor will
affect circuit design.
Frequency limitations of transistors
Many factors affect the frequency response of a transistor. These fac-
tors include physical construction characteristics, electron transit
time between the emitter and collector, interelement capacitance, and
25 × 125
1
25β
1E(mA)
25β
IE (mA)
4500
3500
R c
rb
182 CHAPTER FIVE
circuit configuration. Some transistors provide usable gain in the hun-
dreds of megahertz while others will not operate at frequencies over 50
kHz.
Manufacturers’ specifications or transistor handbooks usually pro-
vide one or more parameters that describe the performance of transis-
tors as a function of frequency. The three most common frequency
parameters are as follows:
 Common-emitter or beta cutoff frequency, fb. This is the fre-
quency at which the ac gain for the common-emitter configura-
tion drops to 70 percent of its value at low frequencies.
Sometimes this parameter is referred to as fae or fhfe. For example
the fb for the 2N2342 npn silicon transistor is rated at 550 kHz.
The ac beta or ac current gain for this transistor at low frequen-
cies will range from 10 to 40 with an average of about 25. If the
frequency of operation is increased to 550 kHz, the average ac
beta of 25 will drop by 70 percent, or to about 17.5. For frequen-
cies above 550 kHz, the ac beta drops sharply.
 Common-base or alpha cutoff frequency, fT. Sometimes referred
to as fab or fhfb, this parameter describes the frequency at which the
ac alpha gain drops to 70 percent of its value at low frequencies.
 Common-emitter gain-bandwidth product frequency, fT. The fT is
defined as the frequency for which beta or ac current gain has
dropped to unity or 1.
The common-collector configuration
The third basic transistor configuration is the common-collector or
emitter follower, illustrated in Fig. 5.36. Either npn or pnp transistors
can be used in these circuits. The only difference is that the power
supply polarity is reversed.
The three useful characteristics of the common-collector configura-
tion are:
 Extremely high input resistance, ranging up to 500 k.
 Very low output resistance, from about 50 to 1000 ohms.
 Current gain approximately equal to the beta rating of the tran-
sistor.
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 183
The primary advantage of the common-collector configuration is its
ability to act as an impedance-matching device, transforming a high-
impedance, low-current signal to a low-impedance, high-current signal.
In this sense, the common-collector configuration acts as a step-down
transformer. Unlike the transformer with a limited frequency response
and no power gain, the common-collector configuration operates over a
wide frequency range, approximately equal to the beta cutoff frequency,
fb, rating of the transistor. The current gain of the common-collector cir-
cuit is approximately equal to the beta of the transistor.
The common-collector circuit is similar to the common-emitter cir-
cuit in terms of signal input and biasing arrangements. However, the
common-collector configuration does not provide voltage gain. Note
that the output signal is taken from the emitter terminal that is always
at a lower potential than the base terminal. This difference of potential
is approximately 0.7 volt for silicon transistors and 0.3 volt for germa-
nium transistors. The collector terminal in the common-collector con-
figuration is connected directly to the power source, VCC. Capacitor CC
allows the signal developed at the collector to be bypassed to ground.
This places the collector terminal at an ac ground potential and the
output signal is developed across the emitter resistor, R E.
The common-collector circuits in Fig. 5.36 employ voltage-divider
biasing, also used for the common-emitter configuration. This circuit
Common-collector configurations. (A) An npn common-collector amplifier. (B) A pnp
common-collector amplifier.
Input Input
C1 C1
R2 R2
R1 R1
VCC VCC
npn pnp
C2 C2
RE RE
CC CC
Output Output
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 3 6
184 CHAPTER FIVE
compensates for the wide variations in current gain (beta), tempera-
ture characteristics, and aging encountered in transistors. However,
the simple resistor bias network or a separate bias supply can be used
if desired.
Summary of transistor characteristics
Technical information and specifications for particular transistors are
available in manufacturers’ specification sheets and transistor hand-
books. Most handbooks provide a cross-reference listing for replace-
ment purposes. Transistor characteristic curves, available in many of
these publications, are useful in specific design problems. These
curves usually show collector current-and-voltage relationships for
common-base and common-emitter configurations.
Gain and resistance characteristics for the three basic transistor
configurations are given in Table 5.2. This data is typical of the voltage
gain, current gain, input resistance, and output resistance for small-
signal transistors.
Transistor testing
In-circuit testing of equipment using transistors is best accomplished
with the aid of a schematic diagram that provides key voltage and
resistance test data. Defective transistors or other components often
can be quickly located by analyzing voltage and resistance readings.
Table 5.2 Bipolar Transistor Characteristics
Common- Common- Common-
Characteristic base emitter collector
of transistor configuration configuration configuration
Input resistance
(ohms) 30 to 150 500 to 1500 5 k to 500 k
Output resistance
(ohms) 100 k to 500 k 30 k to 50 k 50 to 1000
Voltage gain 500 to 1500 300 to 1000 Less than 1
Current gain Less than 1 25 to 100 25 to 100
Power gain 500 to 1500 Up to 10,000 Up to 100
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 185
A close visual inspection for loose connections, short circuits, or
poor solder joints is a prerequisite for any troubleshooting of transistor
circuits. Such preliminary efforts can save many hours of investigating
erroneous indications.
Voltage measurements should be made with voltmeters possessing
a sensitivity of 20,000 ohms per volt or greater. Otherwise, the internal
resistance of the voltmeter might change the transistor biasing circuit
and show incorrect voltage readings. Vacuum tube voltmeters (VTVM)
or transistorized voltmeters (TVM) with input impedances on the
order of 11 megohms are preferred for these types of measurements.
Digital voltmeters are especially suited to voltage measurements in
transistor circuits. Key voltage measurements in any transistor circuit
should include base-emitter bias voltage and collector and emitter
voltages.
Commercial in-circuit transistor testers are available for checking
individual transistors wired into the circuit. However, some knowl-
edge of the particular circuit might be required to ensure a thorough
test of the transistor. For example, coils, transformers, resistors, and
forward-biased diodes can produce low-resistance shunts across the
transistor elements.
Transistor testing with ohmmeters
Front-to-back resistance measurements involving both pn junctions is
a simple but effective way to determine the general condition of a tran-
sistor. However, this test does not give the alpha or beta current-gain
values or other performance characteristics expected from the transis-
tor. The ohmmeter test is best accomplished with the transistor
removed from the circuit. Only a detailed examination of the particu-
lar circuit involved will indicate if the transistor can be tested while
wired in the circuit.
Before attempting to use the ohmmeter for testing transistors, deter-
mine the polarity of the ohmmeter test leads due to the internal bat-
tery. Normally, the positive terminal of the battery will be connected to
the red (positive) test lead. An external voltmeter can be used to verify
this polarity. This information is helpful in identifying npn or pnp
transistors.
Avoid using any ohmmeter range that can cause excessive current
to flow within the transistor. For example, the maximum base-emitter
186 CHAPTER FIVE
voltage for many transistors will range between 3 to 6 volts. Ohmme-
ters employing internal battery voltages exceeding 3 volts can damage
or destroy a good transistor. Also, the R × 1 scale in most ohmmeters
will allow excessive current to flow in the pn junctions of the transis-
tors, causing permanent damage. Never use the R × 1 scale; the R × 10
or R × 100 scale is generally safe for testing transistors and will provide
adequate resistance readings.
The test procedure is based on considering the transistor as two indi-
vidual pn junction diodes. Figure 5.37 shows the pnp and npn transis-
tors in the initial stage of testing forward biasing. Each internal pn
junction is represented as a diode. The solid-line connections are used
for checking the forward resistance of the collector-base pn junction of
either transistor. When this reading is obtained, the lead connected to the
collector is moved to the emitter terminal. This provides the forward
resistance reading for the emitter-base pn junction. To obtain the reverse
resistance readings for each junction, simply reverse the test leads and
repeat the procedure just described.
In either type of transistor, pnp or npn, the ohmmeter is used to
check the forward-biased resistance of the collector-base and emitter-
base junctions. Record these readings and reverse the ohmmeter test
Initial set for testing transistors with an ohmmeter.
p n p n p n

Emitter
Base
Collector
Emitter Collector

Base
Caution- set ohmmeter
to either R   10 or R   100
ranges for resistance
measurements. Other
ranges may destroy
transistor being tested.
Ohmmeter
F I G U R E 5 . 3 7
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 187
leads and repeat the resistance reading. This provides the reverse-
biased resistance readings for both junctions. In general, a high front-
to-back ratio of resistance (about 100 to 1) should be obtained for each
junction of germanium transistors. The front-to-back resistance ratio
for silicon transistor junctions can exceed 1,000,000 to 1. Table 5.3
shows typical values of resistance measurements for both small-signal
and power transistors.
Field-Effect Transistors
Field-effect transistors, like vacuum tubes, use an electric field to
control the flow of current within the device. This permits the control
element, called a gate, to exhibit an extremely high input resistance
in the range of hundreds to thousands of megohms. This desirable
characteristic, along with an ability to provide amplification, makes
the field-effect transistor, or FET, a valuable component for solid-state
circuit design.
There are basically two types of field-effect transistors—the junc-
tion field-effect transistor, or JFET, and the insulated-gate field-effect
Table 5.3 Resistance Measurements for Transistors
Condition for Medium- to
resistance Low-power transistors high-power transistors
measurement Germanium Silicon Germanium Silicon
Forward
collector-to-base 100 ohms 200 ohms 50 ohms 100 ohms
resistance or less or less or less or less
Forward
emitter-to-base 100 ohms 200 ohms 50 ohms 100 ohms
resistance or less or less or less or less
Reverse
collector-to-base 200,000 ohms Almost infinite 1000 ohms Almost infinite
resistance or less or less
Reverse
emitter-to-base 200,000 ohms Almost infinite 1000 ohms Almost infinite
resistance or less or less
188 CHAPTER FIVE
transistor, or IGFET. The IGFET is also referred to as a metal-oxide
semiconductor FET, or MOSFET.
The junction field-effect transistor
The JFET is basically a tiny bar of doped silicon that acts as a resistor.
This bar, referred to as a channel, can be constructed from either n-
type or p-type silicon material. Figure 5.38 shows a cross-sectional
view of a simple n-channel JFET. The n-channel material contains
many free electrons capable of sustaining a usable current through the
device. The terminals connecting each end of the n-channel to an out-
put circuit are designated as source and drain.
The gate consists of doped silicon material opposite to that of the
channel material. The gate is normally embedded in the channel mate-
rial by a diffusion process. In Fig. 5.38, the gate is made of p-type sili-
con material.
Cross-sectional view of the n-channel junction field-effect transistor with biasing circuit.

ID
Drain
terminal
n-type channel
doped silicon
Depletion
zone
p-type gate
doped silicon
Gate
terminal
VGS
Source
terminal

VDD
Free
electrons
p-type gate
doped silicon
RD
F I G U R E 5 . 3 8
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 189
The pn junctions formed within the device produce depletion
zones, the widths of which can be controlled by placing a voltage
potential between the gate and channel material. Reverse biasing these
pn junctions results in expanding the depletion zones and restricting
the flow of free electrons within the n-channel. Thus, current flow
depends on the size of the depletion zone, which in turn is controlled
by the voltage on the gate terminal. If the depletion region extends
across the width of the n-channel, current flow is cut off. The value of
the gate voltage, VGS, which reduces the current flow to zero is called
the pinch-off voltage.
Maximum current flow in the channel material occurs when the
gate voltage is zero. This is equivalent to the gate being shorted to the
source terminal. Most JFET specification sheets provide the typical
value of the shorted-gate drain current. This current is designated as
IDSS. The subscript DDS is defined as drain to source with shorted gate.
The value of IDSS is used in designing JFET circuits.
Because the pn junctions in JFETs are operated in the reverse-
biased mode, negligible current flows in the junction. This accounts
for the extremely high input resistance at the gate terminal.
The p-channel JFETs are constructed with silicon p-type channel
material and n-type gates. The p-channel contains many holes or posi-
tive charge carriers, which are capable of conducting a usable current
through the device. As anticipated, the power supply polarities and
direction of current flow are reversed for p-channel JFETs when com-
pared to n-channel. Figures 5.39 and 5.40 show both n- and p-channel
JFETs with different biasing circuits. The circuits in Fig. 5.39 employ
separate power sources for gate biasing. Figure 5.40 shows n- and p-
channel JFET amplifiers, each with single power sources and voltage-
divider biasing networks. The dc gate bias voltage, VGS, is developed by
voltage-divider network R1 R2 and the voltage drop across source
resistor RS. Capacitor CS bypasses any ac signals to ground while main-
taining a dc voltage level between the source terminal and ground.
Characteristics of junction field-effect transistors
One of the major advantages of the JFET is its extremely high input
resistance, which approaches infinity for most circuits. However, this
high input resistance results in less control over output drain current,
or in effect, less voltage amplification. The effective voltage gain of a
190 CHAPTER FIVE
JFET is substantially less than that of the bipolar transistor. The volt-
age gain of JFET amplifiers is typically on the order of 5 to 50 as com-
pared to 100 to 200 for bipolar transistors. The current gain
characteristics of JFETs are much superior to that of bipolar transis-
tors. In fact, these gain values approach infinity because virtually no
current flows in the JFET input circuit.
JFET circuit configurations
JFETs can be employed in three basic circuit configurations: common
source, common gate, and common drain. Similar in performance to
Biasing circuits for n- and p-channel JFETs using separate power sources for gate and
drain requirements. (A) n-channel JFET. (B) p-channel JFET.
VGS
G D
S
VDS
VDD
ID
RD


VGS
G D
S
VDS
VDD
ID
RD
 
BA
F I G U R E 5 . 3 9
Voltage-divider biasing circuits for n- and p-channel JFETs using a single power supply.
(A) n-channel JFET. (B) p-channel JFET.
Input
C1
R1 RD
G D
S
R2 RS CS
CC
VDD
Output Input
C1
R1 RD
G D
S
R2 RS
CC
VDD
Output
CS
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 4 0
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 191
the three basic bipolar transistor configurations, these circuits are
also valid for the insulated-gate field-effect transistors, or IGFET
devices.
Figure 5.41 and Table 5.4 show these three basic circuits and
related characteristics. The transistors used in these circuits are n-
channel devices. For p-channel devices, the power supply polarities
and directions of current flow are reversed.
The three basic JFET circuit configurations. (A) Common-source n-channel JFET ampli-
fier. (B) Common-drain n-channel JFET amplifier. (C) Common-gate n-channel JFET
amplifier.
V
V
V
V
V
VInput signal
voltage waveform
Input Output
RG
RD
VDDVGG
G D
S
Output signal
voltage waveform
 
V
V
V
V

Input signal
voltage waveform
Output signal
voltage waveform
Input OutputR G VGG
S
RS
D
G
VCC
Input signal
voltage waveform
V
V
Output signal
voltage waveform
 
Input Output
VSS VDD
RS
RD
G
S D
B
A
C
F I G U R E 5 . 4 1
192 CHAPTER FIVE
Insulated-gate field-effect transistors
IGFET transistors, sometimes referred to as metal-oxide semiconductor
field-effect transistors, or MOSFETs, are similar in performance to JFETs.
Gate biasing methods used for JFETs are, in general, applicable to IGFETs.
There are two basic types of insulated-gate field-effect transistors:
depletion-mode and enhancement-mode IGFETs. The depletion-mode
IGFET operates in a manner similar to that of the junction field-effect
transistor. However, the depletion-mode device does not use a pn junc-
tion to produce the depletion zone. As illustrated in Fig. 5.42, the gate is
insulated from the channel material by a thin layer of metal oxide. The
n-type material, heavily doped to provide many free electrons, is embed-
ded in a base of lightly doped p-type material. This base material is
referred to as the substrate.
Depletion-mode IGFET operation
Either n- or p-channel semiconductor material can be used to con-
struct IGFETs. The depletion-mode IGFET in Fig. 5.42 shows an n-
channel type with one gate. This gate and the narrow n-channel form
a capacitor with the metal-oxide insulator acting as a dielectric.
Table 5.4 Characteristics of Three Basic JFET Amplifier Configurations
Common-source Common-drain Common-gate
Characteristics configuration configuration configuration
Input resistance Extremely high Extremely high Very low
Output resistance Moderate Low Moderate
Voltage gain High Less than 1 Moderate
Current gain Extremely high Extremely high Less than 1
Power gain Extremely high Extremely high Moderate
Phase input/output
relationship 180° 0° 0°
Primary use Voltage amplifier High-to-low Stable
impedance High-frequency
matching amplifier
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 193
When the gate potential is zero volts, current flows through the n-
channel due to the abundance of free electrons or negative-charge car-
riers. The positive potential on the drain terminal attracts the free
electrons within the n-channel, causing current flow. The depletion-
mode IGFET is considered a normally on device—current flows in the
channel material when the gate is at zero potential.
If a positive voltage is connected to the gate terminal, the gate side
of the capacitor assumes a positive potential and the n-channel mater-
ial assumes a negative potential. This causes more free electrons to be
induced into the n channel and, hence, more current flow within the
device. Note in contrast that the gate on an n-channel JFET is never
allowed to become positive. This is one major difference between the
operation of IGFETs and JFETs.
When the IGFET gate is connected to a negative potential, the capac-
itance of the gate and the n-channel produces a positive charge in the
n-channel material. This reduces the number of free electrons within
the n-channel material, in effect creating a depletion zone. Subse-
Depletion-mode n-channel insulated-gate field-effect transistor (IGFET).


Heavily doped
n-type source region
Source
VGGVGG
Gate
Metal gate
structure
Silicon dioxide
insulating material
Heavily doped n-type
drain region
Drain
ID
n-channel
moderate
doping
Substrate
Lightly doped p-type
substrate RD
VDD
F I G U R E 5 . 4 2
194 CHAPTER FIVE
quently, the current flow within the device is reduced. As the negative
gate voltage is increased, the drain current is finally reduced to zero.
Depletion-mode IGFETs can be constructed with p-channel semi-
conductor material embedded in an n-type substrate. When using
these p-channel devices, power supply polarities must be reversed
from that used for n-channel devices. Note that the direction of current
flow will also be reversed.
Dual-gate depletion-mode IGFETs contain two independent gate
structures, each capable of controlling the drain current. These
devices are useful as mixers or gain-controlled amplifiers in mixer, RF,
and IF stages of receivers.
Some IGFETs are available with zener-diode input networks to pro-
tect the gates from accidental exposure to high voltage such as static
electrical discharges. The extremely thin metal-oxide insulating mate-
rial can easily be punctured and permanently damaged by excessive
high voltage between the gate and other terminals of the device. The
zener diodes are connected back-to-back across each gate to provide a
discharge path for excessive voltages appearing across these terminals.
During normal operation, the zener diodes do not conduct and, thus
do not load the input circuit.
Symbols for the depletion-mode IGFETs are given in Fig. 5.43.
Enhancement-mode insulated-gate field-effect transistors
A major difference in the operation of enhancement-mode IGFETs as
compared to depletion-mode IGFETs is that they act as normally off
devices. Drain current flows only when a potential, equal in polarity to
that of the drain supply, is applied to the gate terminal.
Enhancement-mode IGFETs are designated as either p-channel or n-
channel devices. Figure 5.44 illustrates a p-channel depletion-mode
IGFET. This device consists of a tiny block of lightly doped n-type mate-
rial with separate drain and source p-type regions embedded or diffused
in the block. The metal gate, separated from the block by a thin layer of
metal-oxide insulating material, overlaps the drain and source regions.
As in the case of the depletion-mode IGFET, the gate and semiconductor
material form two plates of a capacitor, with the insulating material serv-
ing as a dielectric.
When there is no potential on the gate terminal, no conduction
path exists for source-to-drain current flow. When a negative poten-
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 195
tial is applied to the gate, holes or positive-charge carriers are
induced into the region forming the capacitor plate. Because the drain
is at a negative potential, these holes flow into the drain region.
Therefore, a positive charge flows within the device. Increasing the
negative potential on the gate terminal produces a corresponding
increase in drain current.
The n-channel enhancement-mode IGFETs are similar in construc-
tion to the p-channel device. However, the substrate is formed from
lightly doped p-type material, and drain and source regions are
embedded or diffused n-type material. As anticipated, the power
source polarity, gate polarity, and direction of current flow are
reversed when compared to the n-channel device. A positive gate
potential is required to “turn on” the drain current in the n-channel
Symbols used for various types of depletion-mode insulated-gate field-effect transis-
tors. (A) Single-gate n-channel. (B) Single-gate p-channel. (C) Dual-gate n-channel.
(D) Dual-gate diode-protected p-channel.
Drain
Source
Gate Substrate Substrate
Drain
Source
Gate
Gate No. 1
Gate No. 2
Drain
Source
Substrate
connected
to source
Gate No. 1
Gate No. 2
Drain
Source
BA
C D
F I G U R E 5 . 4 3
196 CHAPTER FIVE
enhancement-mode IGFET. Symbols for the enhancement-mode
IGFETs are given in Fig. 5.45.
Care and handling of insulated-gate semiconductor devices
Insulated-gate field-effect transistors are extremely susceptible to per-
manent damage when subjected to excessive high voltages and cur-
rents. For example, normal static electricity that exists on the human
body and test probes can puncture the gate structure on IGFETs that do
not have zener-diode protective networks. Maximum voltage and cur-
rent ratings as specified in manufacturers’ data sheets or transistor
handbooks should never be exceeded.
Extreme care must be exercised in handling, testing, and installing
insulated-gate devices. The device leads should be kept shorted
together until the device is installed and soldered in the required cir-
cuit. Most IGFETs are shipped by the manufacturer with the leads
shorted together in some fashion such as by a shorting wire or con-
ductive foam packing.
P-channel enhancement-mode insulated-gate field-effect transistor with biasing circuit.

p-type source region
heavily doped producing
many holes
Source
VGG
Gate
Metal gate
structure
Silicon dioxide
insulating material
p-type drain region
heavily doped
Drain
ID
n-channel
moderate
doping Substrate
n-type substrate
lightly doped RD
VDD

F I G U R E 5 . 4 4
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 197
As IGFETs cannot be safely tested with ohmmeters, two alternate
means of testing are recommended if a commercial IGFET tester is not
available:
 Check the device installed in the original circuit using the man-
ufacturer’s recommended test procedures. This might include
specific resistance measurements with the power off and voltage
and signal waveform analysis with the power on. This type of
test procedure usually leads to the identification of the defective
component.
 Replace the suspect IGFET with a substitute IGFET that is
known to be good. If no direct replacement is available, a similar
device can be found using cross-reference listings in transistor
handbooks. The device leads should be left shorted together
until it is installed and soldered in the circuit. Soldering iron
tips and tools should be shorted to the circuit ground during
installation. Finally, no test signals should be applied to the
IGFET input circuit with the drain power source turned off.
Optoelectronic Devices
Semiconductor technology has made possible the development of
many specialized semiconductor devices for electronic functions such
as light detection and display. The optoelectronics family includes the
light emitting display (LED), liquid crystal display (LCD), photodiode,
Symbols for enhancement-mode insulated-gate field-effect transistors. (A) n-channel.
(B) p-channel.
Drain
Source
Gate Substrate
Drain
Source
Gate Substrate
A B
F I G U R E 5 . 4 5
198 CHAPTER FIVE
phototransistor, and optocoupler. The
electronic display devices are used to dis-
play frequency and other information in
amateur radios, and alphanumeric dis-
plays for computers. Photodiodes and
phototransistors are used to detect the
presence and intensity of light energy.
Many modern amateur radios use the
above devices to control and display oper-
ating information such as frequency, mod-
ulation modes, signal power levels, and
memories.
Photodiodes
Photodiodes are light-sensitive devices
made with semiconductor materials.
There are two basic types of photodiodes,
the photoconductive and photovoltaic
diodes. Each type detects the presence of
light.
The photoconductive diode requires a
reverse bias voltage for proper operation.
Light waves striking an exposed pn junc-
tion cause a sizable increase in current
flowing through the device. This increase
in current can be used to switch on a tran-
sistor which, in turn, can be used to acti-
vate a relay or control a larger current.
A photovoltaic diode converts the
energy contained in light waves striking
the device into electrical energy. The typi-
cal photovoltaic diode has a large exposed pn junction upon which the
light waves are directed. The schematic symbol for the photodiode is
shown in Fig. 5.46A.
As you might suspect, exposed pn junctions of bipolar npn or pnp
transistors can be used as sensitive light detectors. Such phototransis-
tors are used in fiber-optic and other applications.
Optoelectronic devices. (A) Photodiode. (B) Light-
emitting diode. (C) Seven-segment display, LCD or LED.
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
B
C
A
F I G U R E 5 . 4 6
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 199
Light-emitting diodes
The light-emitting diode, or LED, represents a major improvement in
visual display capability. Virtually all new amateur radios employ
LEDs to provide frequency display. With its rugged construction, small
compact size, and almost unlimited life expectancy, the LED can be
switched on and off at a very high rate.
LEDs use a forward-biased pn junction that radiates energy in the
form of light waves. This radiation is due to free electrons crossing the
pn junction into the p-type region and combining with holes in this
region. Usually a high-efficiency semiconductor material, such as gal-
lium or phosphorus, is used in manufacturing LEDs. These materials
allow construction of LEDs with radiation wavelengths in the red,
green, or yellow regions of a visual spectrum.
Most LEDs require a forward bias voltage of about 1.2 volts and a
current of about 15 to 20 milliamperes. Segmented displays for letters
or numbers consist of many LEDs connected in series. Digital fre-
quency displays for receivers and the numeric displays of pocket cal-
culators are typical examples of LED display devices.
Figure 5.46B and 5.46C shows the schematic symbols for LEDs and
a typical seven-segment LED display.
LCD displays
The LCD, or liquid crystal display, is a popular display device used in
amateur radios, pocket calculators, miniature TV sets, and portable or
“laptop” computers to display alphanumeric and graphic information.
Most LCDs are configured as seven-segment displays to permit display
of numeric and limited alpha characters. The operation of an LCD is
different from the LED in that the LCD does not generate a light; it sup-
presses reflected or incident light on an LCD segment. This produces a
dark area on the LCD segment. LCD displays cannot be used in the
dark or low light levels. In many applications, an external light source
is provided to permit reading the displayed information.
The operation of LCDs is based on polarization characteristics of
light. The nematic liquid crystal material in the nonactivated LCD seg-
ments reflects incident rays of light in a normal manner; this causes
the LCD segment to appear invisible. Applying a voltage potential to
the LCD segment and backplane activates the LCD segment, producing
200 CHAPTER FIVE
a random scattering of incident light. This effect makes the LCD seg-
ment appear dark to an observer.
Unlike the LEDs and other optical displays, LCDs require very low
operating voltages and currents. Such an advantage is important in the
use of battery operated equipments. Another advantage is that LCDs
are readable in bright sunlight; LEDs tend to “fade out” under these
conditions. Thus, LCD indicators are very popular in mobile amateur
radios. Figure 5-46C shows a schematic symbol for an LCD seven-seg-
ment display device.
Integrated Circuits
The development of the integrated circuit, or IC, in the late 1950s has
revolutionized the electronics industry. The ability to implement a
complete electronic circuit consisting of thousands of transistors,
diodes, resistors, and capacitors on a single tiny chip simply could not
be envisioned in the days of the vacuum tube. This fantastic reduction
in size, along with mass production techniques and resultant cost
reductions, is one of the major accomplishments of this century. The
cost of a typical IC is less than that of a conventional vacuum tube.
Types of integrated circuits
There are four basic types of integrated circuits: monolithic, thin film,
thick film, and hybrid. Each type involves different methods of con-
struction with varying advantages, performance characteristics, and
costs.
The monolithic IC uses a single chip of semiconductor material on
which are formed the many individual components and interconnect-
ing circuitry. This base, or substrate, can be either n- or p-type mater-
ial. Diffusion or growth techniques are used to assemble transistors,
diodes, resistors, and capacitors on this tiny chip. Inductors are sel-
dom incorporated within ICs due to the large physical size of practical
coils. When required, external connections are provided for separate
inductors.
Integrated circuits are produced in batches of about 25 to several
hundred chips on a single wafer. When all individual components and
interconnecting circuitry have been formed on each chip, the wafer is
cut into separate chips. These chips are tested with automatic test
TUBES AND SEMICONDUCTORS 201
machines which check the quality and performance of the mass-pro-
duced chips. Figure 5.47 shows an enlargement of a microprocessor or
a computer-on-a-chip.
The thin-film IC is similar to the monolithic IC except that the base
material is composed of an insulating material such as glass or
Motorola’s MC68020 32-bit Microprocessor IC. This photograph of a modern micro-
processor or “computer-on-a-chip” shows the complexity of IC manufacturing technol-
ogy. With an on-board RAM and ROM memory, this microprocessor can act as a
stand-alone computer for many applications, such as radio transceivers and modems.
F I G U R E 5 . 4 7
202 CHAPTER FIVE
ceramic. This type of construction is used when a high degree of insu-
lation between components is required.
Thick-film technology uses deposited resistors and capacitors on a
common substrate. Individual transistors and diode chips are added as
discrete components. Hybrid ICs, similar to thick-film ICs, combine
monolithic and thin-film components on a ceramic base. Thick-film
and hybrid ICs are usually produced in limited quantities for special-
ized applications.
A typical IC—the 555 timer
Figure 5.48 shows the technical specifications for the Signetics 555
timer. This IC was used in the code-practice oscillator described in
Chap. 2. As indicated in Fig. 5.48, the 555 timer is available in either
an 8-pin or a 14-pin DIP (dual in-line package). The 555 timer is a ver-
satile linear IC. It has been used in numerous applications. Many tech-
nical articles in radio and electronics magazines have been devoted to
projects involving the 555 timer.
Packaging of integrated circuits
Normally IC clips are mounted in plastic cases with connecting leads
suitable for either installing in sockets or soldering in printed-circuit
boards. Figure 5.49 shows a typical 14-pin DIP or TO-116 case. Other
ICs are available in many configurations including the standard TO-
5 transistor case, 10-pin ceramic flat packs, and 16- to 40-pin DIP
cases.
Linear and digital integrated circuits
In general, ICs can be classified as either linear or digital. Linear ICs
can contain many individual transistors, diodes, or complete amplifier
circuits designed for specific applications. These linear functions
include amplification of ac signals ranging from audio to radio fre-
quencies, modulators, demodulators, and oscillators. Figure 5.50
shows an IC containing all the semiconductors required for an AM
radio.
Digital ICs contain digital logic elements, such as gates, inverters,
flip-flops, counters, and microprocessors—virtually a complete com-
puter on a single chip. Two expressions are sometimes used to
The 555 timer integrated circuit. Signetics Corporation, 811 East Arques Avenue, P.O. Box 3409, Sunnyvale, CA
94088-3409, Telephone: (408) 991-2000
Description
The 555 monolithic timing circuit is a highly
stable controller capable of producing
accurate time delays, or oscillation. In the
time delay mode of operation, the time is
precisely controlled by one external resistor
and capacitor. For a stable operation as an
oscillator, the free running frequency and the
duty cycle are both accurately controlled
with two external resistors and one capacitor.
The circuit may be triggered and reset on
falling waveforms, and the output structure
can source or sink up to 200 mA.

Features
• Turn off time less than 2 s
• Maximum operating
frequency greater
than 500 kHz
• Timing from microseconds
to hours
• Operates in both astable
and monostable modes
• High output current
• Adjustable duty cycle
• TTL compatible
• Temperature stability of
0.005% per C
Applications
• Precision timing
• Pulse generation
• Sequential timing
• Time delay generation
Pin configurations
D, N, FE Package
1
2
3
4
Top view
Order numbers
NE/SE555N NE555D
SE555CN,CFE
8
7
6
5
Ground
Trigger
Output
Reset
V CC
Discharge
Threshold
Control
voltage
F Package
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
V CC
NC
Discharge
NC
Threshold
NC
Control
voltage
GND
NC
Trigger
Output
NC
Reset
NC
Top view
Order numbers
NE/SE555F SE555CF
Absolute maximum ratings
Parameter Rating Unit
Supply voltage
SE555
NE555, SE555C
Power dissipation
Operating temperature range
NE555
SE555, SE555C
Storage temperature range
Lead temperature (soldering, 60 sec.)
18
16
600
0 to 70
55 to 125
65 to 150
300
V
V
mW
C
C
C
C
Block diagram
V CC
8
R
Control
voltage
5
Threshold
6 Comparator
R
2
Trigger
Comparator
R
Discharge
7
Flip flop
Output
stage
Reset
4
Output Ground
3 1
V CC
8
FM
5
R1
4.7 K
R2
830
R3
4.7 K
R1
1 K R12
6.6 K
Q5 Q6 Q7
Q8
Q9
Threshold
6 Q1
Q2 Q3
Q4
R7
5 K
Q19
Q21
Q22
R13
3.9 K
Output
3
Q23
C S
2
4
7
1
Trigger
Reset
Discharge
GND Q14
Q25
R5
10 K
R6
100
R16
100
Q10
Q11 Q12
Q13
R9
5 K
Q15
Q16
R8
5 K
C B
Q18
E
Q17
Q20
R11
4.7 K
R15
4.7 K
R14
220 Q24
F I G U R E 5 . 4 8
204 CHAPTER FIVE
describe these ICs: MSI (medium-scale
integration) and LSI (large-scale integra-
tion). The MSI chip contains up to about
100 individual logic elements such as gates
while the LSI chip may contain hundreds
to thousands or more of these elements.
Radio communications systems, includ-
ing some amateur radio equipment, employ
a combination of linear and digital ICs to
perform the basic functions of signal gener-
ation, amplification, conversion, frequency
counting, and digital display. The micro-
processor and digital memory ICs are being used to perform basic sta-
tion functions, such as Morse-code keying, encoding, and translation;
logging and tuning operations; and special modulation schemes.
Typical 14-pin DIP (dual in-line package) case.
F I G U R E 5 . 4 9
Integrated circuit for a complete AM radio receiver.
F I G U R E 5 . 4 4
The operation of your amateur radio equipment either solid-state or
vacuum-tube type, requires a stable source of dc power. Batteries
can be used to provide power for portable, mobile, or low-power
“QRP” rigs. However, the ac power line is more appropriate for fixed-
station operation involving high-power transmitters. Power supplies
are used to convert the ac line power to the required dc operation.
A trend in modern-day amateur equipment, such as HF and VHF
solid-state transceivers, is to design for 12- to 13.5-Vdc power require-
ments. With separate ac-line-operated power supplies, this equipment
offers the flexibility of both portable/mobile and fixed-station use. Some
transceivers have internal power supplies that are operable from either
a 12- to 13.5-Vdc power source or a 120-Vac, 60-Hz power source.
Power-supply design today is focused on two separate types: the more
conventional diode rectifer, capacitor filter, and electronic voltage regu-
lator power supply; and the more recently developed electronic “switch-
ing” power supply. The first type—covered in this book—is more suitable
for home design and construction and will provide stable dc power for
amateur equipment with a modest investment of time and money. The
electronic switching power supply, a more recent development, is gener-
ally much smaller in size and provides improved efficiency. However,
the design and construction of the switching power supply is beyond the
scope of this book and most beginners in amateur radio.
Power Supplies
6
205
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
206 CHAPTER SIX
Definitions
Diode A diode is a two-element device that allows current flow in
one direction but restricts or eliminates current flow in the opposite
direction. Diodes are used in power supplies to rectify the ac current.
Diodes can be either vacuum tubes or semiconductor devices and are
illustrated in Fig. 6.1.
Half-wave rectifier Normally consisting of a single diode, the half-
wave rectifier allows only half of the ac current to flow through the
load, producing a pulsating dc current. A basic half-wave circuit is
shown in Fig. 6.2.
Full-wave rectifier The full-wave rectifier, shown in Fig. 6.3,
allows both halves of the ac current to flow through the load in the
same direction. This produces a pulsating dc with a frequency twice
that of the original ac waveform.
Rectification Rectification is defined as the process of converting
an ac current to a dc current. Rectifiers are basically forms of diodes,
either vacuum tubes or semiconductor devices.
Filter circuit The filter circuit in a power supply smooths out the ac
ripple in the rectified dc current, producing a relatively constant output
voltage across the load. Figure 6.4 shows several types of filter circuits.
Transformers Transformers are electromagnetic devices consisting of
two or more windings that are inductively coupled to transfer electrical
Typical diodes used as rectifiers. (A) Vacuum tube rectifier. (B) Semiconductor diode.
Plate
(Anode)
Cathode
Heater or
filament
CathodeAnode
A B
F I G U R E 6 . 1
POWER SUPPLIES 207
energy from one winding to the other(s). The transformer is used in most
ac-operated power supplies to perform two important functions. First, it
is used to step-up or step-down the ac line voltage to the required operat-
ing levels. The second function of the transformer is that of isolating the
power output circuit from the ac power line. This reduces or eliminates
the potential shock hazard involved in direct connection to the ac power
line. Figures 6.2 and 6.3 illustrate the use of power transformers.
Regulator circuit The purpose of the regulator circuit in a power sup-
ply is to maintain a constant output voltage under conditions of varying
input ac line voltage or output load resistance. In its simplest form, a regu-
lator circuit might consist of a loading resistor permanently connected
The half-wave rectifier.
To ac
power line
Transformer Rectifier
V S VLRL
VS
0
VS
VL
0
VS ac input waveform
VL pulsating dc output waveform
F I G U R E 6 . 2
The full-wave rectifier.
To ac
power
line
Transformer CR1
CR2
VS
VS RL VL
CR1, CR2 - Rectifiers
VS ac input waveform
VL pulsating dc
output waveform
VS
0
VS
VS
0
F I G U R E 6 . 3
208 CHAPTER SIX
Typical filter circuits used in power supplies. (A) Simple filter capacitor. (B) Choke input filter. (C) Capaci-
tor-input pi filter.
Rectifier
section VIN VL
RLC
 
VIN
0
VL
0
Input
Output
 
L1 L2
VIN RL VLC1 C2
Input
Output
VIN
0
VL
0
 
Rectifier
section
Rectifier
section C1 C2 R L VL
Choke
L1
Input
Output
VIN
0
VL
0
ChokeSwinging
Choke
C
B
A
F I G U R E 6 . 4
POWER SUPPLIES 209
across the output of the power supply. The resistor acts as a partial load,
which reduces the load/no-load voltage variations experienced with sim-
ple power supplies. Electronic voltage regulators, using vacuum tubes or
semiconductor devices, maintain a constant output voltage within speci-
fied limits of variations in the input ac power line voltage and output load
conditions. Semiconductor voltage regulators include zener diodes, tran-
sistors, or special integrated circuits designed for this purpose.
Ripple voltage Usually associated with the dc output of a rectifier
circuit, the ripple voltage is defined as the ac component inherent in
the dc output voltage. Filters are used to reduce or eliminate the ac rip-
ple voltage.
Power-Supply Design Considerations
Power-supply design discussed in this section is based on the use of
semiconductor devices and relatively low output voltage requirements.
Information on vacuum-tube power supplies is available in the many
amateur radio publications, which can be obtained at libraries, news-
stands, or electronic parts distributors. However, the principles involved
in either vacuum-tube or semiconductor power supplies are the same.
The power transformer
Power transformers are normally specified in terms of input and out-
put voltages, and the current rating of the secondary winding. Typi-
cal 120-Vac, 60-Hz power transformers have secondary voltages of
6.3 Vac, 12.6 Vac, or 24 Vac. The secondary output voltages are listed
in terms of rms or effective ac volts. The rectified peak output voltage
is 1.414 times the rms value. Thus a 12.6-Vac rms voltage produces a
peak voltage of almost 18 Vdc when rectified. The ac and dc voltage
waveforms are illustrated in Fig. 6.5. Transformer secondary or out-
put voltage requirements are based on the following factors: ac
power line variations, internal voltage drops of the power supply,
and the output load. Internal voltage drops include forward-bias
voltages across rectifiers, ac ripple voltages, and the regulator
dropout voltage, if applicable. These factors will be considered in the
final design criteria.
Secondary-winding current ratings are determined by any internal
power-supply current and the maximum load current anticipated for
210 CHAPTER SIX
the power supply. A good rule of thumb is to select a transformer that
provides at least 50% more secondary current than is required by the
anticipated load requirement. This will prevent overheating problems
and increase life expectancy of the power supply.
Rectifier circuits
Figures 6.2 and 6.3 illustrate the half-wave and full-wave rectifier cir-
cuits, respectively. The half-wave rectifier is rarely used in power-
supply design due to the increased filtering required to reduce the ac
ripple voltage to acceptable levels.
THE FULL-WAVE RECTIFIER
The detailed analysis of the full-wave rectifier is given to illustrate the
operational characteristics of this circuit. Consider the circuit in Fig. 6.6.
A 24-Vac center-tapped transformer, T1, is used to provide 12 Vac to each
rectifier diode. Note that 12 Vac rms is approximately equal to a peak ac
voltage of about 17 volts. The peak ac values must be considered in any
power-supply design.
When the first half of the ac voltage waveform is impressed across
the secondary winding, point A becomes positive and allows diode D1
to conduct. Current flows in the circuit as shown by the solid arrows.
Because point B is negative during this interval, diode D2 is reversed
biased and does not conduct.
During the second half of the ac waveform, point B becomes posi-
tive and this causes diode D2 to conduct. Current flow in the circuit
Relationship of peak, RMS, and rectified dc voltage levels from using a 12.6 Vac transformer.
18 V
12.6 V
0
18 V
Positive
peak value
RMS value
Negative
peak value
ac voltage waveform
18 V
0
Peak rectified
voltage level
Rectified or pulsating dc waveform
F I G U R E 6 . 5
POWER SUPPLIES 211
due to D2 conducting is illustrated by the dashed arrows. Diode D1 is
reversed biased during this portion of the cycle and does not conduct.
The output voltage, VL, appearing across load resistor RL is also
illustrated in Fig. 6.6. The odd-numbered half cycles are related to cur-
rent flow in diode D1 while the even-numbered half cycles are due to
current flow in diode D2.
The advantage of the full-wave rectifier lies in the fact that both
halves of the ac cycle are used, resulting in a ripple frequency of 120
Hz. The main disadvantage of the full-wave rectifier is that a trans-
former with a center-tapped secondary winding and a higher output
voltage is required.
THE FULL-WAVE BRIDGE RECTIFIER
The limitations of the full-wave rectifier can be overcome by the bridge rec-
tifier shown in Fig. 6.7. A description of the operation of the bridge
rectifier is given as follows. Diodes D2 and D4 conduct during the pos-
itive half of the ac cycle. This occurs when point A is positive and point
B is negative. Current flow during this interval is shown by the solid
arrows.
The full-wave rectifier circuit.
ac
input
power
T1
A
17 V
C
B
17 V
D1
D2 RL

VL
T1-120/24 Vac transformer
with center tap
34V
0
34V
VAB ac waveform
17V
0
17V
VAC or VCB ac waveform
0
17V
Rectified pulsating
dc voltage waveform
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
F I G U R E 6 . 6
212 CHAPTER SIX
When the ac voltage across points A and B is reversed during the sec-
ond half of the ac cycle, diodes D1 and D3 conduct. At the same time,
diodes D2 and D4 are reversed biased and are cut off. The resulting cur-
rent flow is shown by the dashed arrows.
The bridge rectifier combines the best features of the half-wave and
full-wave rectifiers—the dc output voltage is approximately equal to
the secondary voltage and the ripple frequency is 120 Hz.
RECTIFIER VOLTAGE AND CURRENT RATINGS
Three characteristics of rectifiers must be considered in any power-supply
design. All are critical to the proper and efficient operation of the power
supply.
Peak inverse voltage (PIV) All rectifiers are rated in terms of peak
inverse voltage. This is defined as the maximum reverse voltage that
the rectifier can withstand during periods of nonconduction. The PIV
ratings of most rectifiers will range from about 50 to 1000 volts. Gen-
erally speaking, the PIV rating for a specific rectifier should be at least
twice the peak ac voltage output of the power transformer. Many
designers add an additional 50% to account for ac line voltage varia-
tions and transient voltage spikes.
Average rectified current (IO) Most rectifiers are rated in terms of the
maximum load current. When individual diodes are used to make up a
full-wave or bridge rectifier, the individual current rating of each diode
must be considered. In general, each diode in a full-wave or bridge recti-
The full-wave bridge rectifier.
ac input
power
A
B
VAC
D1 D2
D4 D3
RL VL

VAC
VAC
VL
VAB ac voltage waveform
V L pulsating dc voltage
waveform
F I G U R E 6 . 7
POWER SUPPLIES 213
fier circuit should have a minimum average current rating of one-half the
maximum load current. For maximum circuit reliability, the average cur-
rent rating of each diode should equal that of the maximum load current.
Encapsulated or packaged rectifier assemblies are normally rated in
terms of maximum load current. It is recommended that the current
rating of the packaged rectifier assembly be about twice that of the
intended maximum load current.
Forward voltage drop (VF) During conduction, the forward voltage
drop across a rectifier diode must be considered as an internal voltage drop
within the power supply. Silicon rectifiers will exhibit a forward voltage
drop of about 1 to 2 volts for each diode. The forward voltage drop for ger-
manium diodes varies from about 0.5 to 1.0 volt. Because two diodes are
always conducting in a bridge rectifier circuit, the total forward voltage
drop for the rectifier circuit ranges from about 2 to 3 volts.
Rectifier and power-diode ratings are available in most semicon-
ductor handbooks. In many instances, the ratings are printed on the
package or box containing the device. Careful attention should be paid
to these ratings when determining the correct specifications for the
internal circuit. Otherwise, using an improper rectifier in the power
supply will result in marginal performance or destruction of the recti-
fier. Table 6.1 provides a partial listing of typical rectifiers that are
widely available.
Filter circuits
We use filter circuits in power supplies to smooth out the varying dc
output from the rectifier. This pulsating dc voltage can cause hum and
other poor operational characteristics in electronic circuits such as
amplifiers.
The primary element in the filter circuit is the filter capacitor. Fig-
ure 6.8 illustrates the action of a filter capacitor during charging and
discharging cycles. First, consider the simple half-wave rectifier with
no filter capacitor. The rectified or pulsating dc voltage developed
across the load resistor, R L, rises to a maximum value, VP, during the
first half of each ac cycle. Then, this rectified voltage drops to zero and
remains at this level during the second half of each ac cycle. This vary-
ing dc voltage, shown in Fig. 6.8B, has the same frequency as the ac
input voltage.
214 CHAPTER SIX
Now add the filter capacitor, CF, to the circuit. For the first half of
the ac cycle, the increasing rectified dc voltage charges the capacitor,
storing electrical energy within the capacitor. When the rectified dc
voltage passes the peak value and starts to fall to zero, the charged
capacitor begins to discharge, providing current to the load resistor.
The diode prevents the capacitor from discharging current back into
the ac source.
TABLE 6.1 Ratings for Typical Rectifier Diodes
Peak inverse Average rectified Forward voltage
Type voltage, PIV forward current, IO drop, VF
1N1199A 50 V 12 A 1.2 V
1N1200A 100 V 12 A 1.2 V
1N1341A 50 V 6 A 1.4 V
1N1342A 100 V 6 A 1.4 V
1N4001 50 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4002 100 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4003 200 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4004 400 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4005 600 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4006 800 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4007 1000 V 1 A 1.6 V
1N4719 50 V 3 A 1.0 V
1N4720 100 V 3 A 1.0 V
1N4721 200 V 3 A 1.0 V
1N4722 400 V 3 A 1.0 V
1N4723 600 V 3 A 1.0 V
1N4724 800 V 3 A 1.0 V
1N4725 1000 V 3 A 1.0 V
POWER SUPPLIES 215
If the capacitor has sufficient capacitance, i.e., many microfarads
for most filter capacitors, the discharge action will not be completed
before the next ac cycle begins. Thus, the next positive half cycle of ac
will produce a dc current flow that recharges the capacitor back to its
original value. This charge and discharge action, illustrated in Fig.
6.8C, occurs once for every ac cycle.
Although the filter capacitor prevents the dc voltage across R L from
dropping to zero, there remains a varying ac component in the dc volt-
age. This ac component is known as the ac ripple voltage. The fre-
quency of the ac ripple voltage is the same as that of the ac power
source, normally 60 Hz for half-wave ac-operated power supplies. Fig-
ure 6.9 illustrates the ac ripple voltage contained in the rectified dc
voltage. The amplitude of the ac ripple voltage, defined as Vmax – Vmin,
depends primarily on two factors: the capacitance of the filter capaci-
tor, C F, and the current flowing in the load resistor, R L. Increasing the
capacitance of C F reduces the ac ripple voltage. Conversely, an
increase in load current results in a higher ac ripple voltage. For half-
wave rectifiers, the approximate ac ripple voltage contained in a sim-
ple, single-capacitor filter circuit is given as:
Action of the filter capacitor in smoothing out the pulsating dc output of the rectifier. (A)
Half-wave rectifier with simple filter capacitor. (B) Pulsating dc voltage VP with no filter
capacitor. (C) dc output voltage Vavg with filter capacitor in circuit.
D1
ac
generator V AC CF RL VP
VP
0
V AVG
0
Capacitor discharges during
these periods of time
B
A
C
F I G U R E 6 . 8
216 CHAPTER SIX
VR  (Eq. 6.1)
where
VR is the ac ripple voltage in volts
I is the load current in milliamperes
C is the capacitance of the filter capacitor in microfarads
Full-wave and bridge rectifiers produce a rectified dc voltage with
an ac ripple frequency twice that of the ac power source. The ripple
frequency is normally 120 Hz for ac-operated power supplies using
full-wave rectifiers. The approximate amplitude of the ac ripple volt-
age for single-capacitor filter circuits used with full-wave or bridge
rectifiers is determined by:
VR  (Eq. 6.2)
As in half-wave rectifier circuits, increasing the value of the filter
capacitor in full-wave rectifier circuits reduces the ac ripple voltage.
However, for the same value of filter capacitance, the ac ripple voltage
in full-wave and bridge rectifiers is approximately one-half that of
half-wave rectifiers.
In regulated solid-state power supplies, the filter circuit normally
consists of two capacitors. One capacitor, normally ranging from hun-
dreds to thousands of microfarads, is used to reduce the ac ripple volt-
8I
C
16I
C
ac ripple voltage in the rectified output of a typical power supply. Note: The levels are
not necessarily to scale because most power supplies have very small ripple voltage
characteristics.
Ripple voltage
VMAX
VMIN
ac cycle
Time
ac cycle
F I G U R E 6 . 9
POWER SUPPLIES 217
age to an acceptable level. The other capacitor, an RF bypass capacitor
of about 0.1 to 0.5 μF, is used to short out any transient voltage spikes,
which occasionally occur on the ac power line. The second capacitor
is required because large-capacitance electrolytic capacitors do not act
as capacitors at high frequencies.
The single-capacitor filter reduces the ac ripple voltage in low-volt-
age regulated power supplies to values from less than 1 volt to about 3
volts. The electronic regulator then takes over and reduces the ac rip-
ple voltage to insignificant values.
Filter circuits for vacuum-tube and solid-state power supplies are
illustrated in Fig. 6.10. These circuits are used when electronic regu-
lators are impractical or too expensive. The two-capacitor input cir-
cuits in Fig. 6.10A and B are known as pi filters, and each component,
capacitor, resistor, and inductor contributes to the filtering process.
The capacitors smooth out the ac ripple voltage and the resistor or
inductor provides opposition to the flow of ac ripple current. The RC
filter circuit in Fig. 6.10A also reduces the dc output voltage of the
power supply.
The choke input filter in Fig. 6.10C is used in power supplies where
the load variation is extensive. For example, the load presented by an
HF transceiver varies considerably from receive to transmit conditions.
Inductor L1 is a special choke designed to improve voltage regulation.
This inductor is referred to as a swinging choke; the inductance varies
with the load current. A disadvantage of the choke-input power supply
is that the dc output voltage is somewhat less than that of the capacitor-
input type.
Filter circuits used in power supplies. (A) Simple RC filter circuit. (B) Capacitor-input
filter circuit. (C) Choke-input LC filter using a swinging choke.
CBA
F I G U R E 6 . 1 0
218 CHAPTER SIX
Electronic voltage regulators
Modern solid-state power supplies
include some form of electronic regulation
to maintain a constant output voltage. The
regulator circuit may consist of zener
diodes, transistors, integrated-circuit
units, or a combination of these devices.
The zener-diode voltage regulator, illus-
trated in Fig. 6.11, is a simple circuit that
provides good regulation for applications requiring low load current.
ZENER-FOLLOWER REGULATOR
The zener-follower regulator, shown in Fig. 6.12, is a series voltage regu-
lator using a power transistor to control the dc output voltage. A zener
diode provides a stable reference voltage on the base of the power transis-
tor, thereby maintaining a constant emitter voltage. The power transistor,
referred to as a series-pass transistor, is connected in a common-collector
or emitter-follower configuration.
The collector-emitter voltage, VCE, is equal to the input unregulated
voltage, VIN, minus the output regulated voltage, VOUT. Thus the power,
PD, that the pass transistor must be able to dissipate is:
Zener-diode voltage regulator.
Input
unregulated
voltage
Zener
diode
Output
regulated
voltage
R S
F I G U R E 6 . 1 1
Zener-follower voltage regulator.
VIN
unregulated
input
voltage
R1
C
Zener
diode
npn
power
transistor
VCE
VD
VOUT
regulated
output
voltage
 
IE
F I G U R E 6 . 1 2
POWER SUPPLIES 219
PD  VCE × IE  (VIN – VOUT) × IE (Eq. 6.3)
The output voltage, VOUT, is determined by the zener diode reference
voltage, VD, less the base-emitter junction voltage, VBE. This junction
voltage is approximately 0.3 volt for germanium transistors and 0.7
volt for silicon transistors. For example, if a dc output voltage of about
12 volts is required, a 13-volt zener diode is recommended.
The value of R1 is based on the power dissipation rating of the zener
diode and the required base current of the pass transistor for both full-
load and no-load conditions.
A typical 12-Vdc, 1-ampere zener-follower regulated power supply
is shown in Fig. 6.13. This power supply is capable of powering ama-
teur equipment with low current requirements such as receivers or
low-power QRP rigs. The output voltage can be changed by substituting
115 Vac
S1
F1
1A
T1
18 Vac
RMS CR1-CR4
Recommended parts list
C1
2000
50 Vdc
R1
330
2W
C2
100
50 Vdc
C E
Q1


C3
0.01
50 Vdc
VR1
13V
1W
R2
1K
1W
Output
12 V, 1A
C1–2000-F, 50 Vdc electrolytic capacitor
C2–100-F, 50 Vdc electrolytic capacitor
C3–0.01 to 0.5-F, 50 Vdc disc ceramic capacitor
CR1 to CR4–IN4002 silicon diodes (or equivalent bridge rectifier assembly)
F1–1 A, 120 Vac fuse
Q1–2N5191 npn silicon power transistor
R1–330-ohms, 2-W, carbon composition resistor
R2–1-K, 1-W, carbon composition resistor
S1–SPST toggle switch, 120 Vac, 2A
T1–Power transformer, 115 Vac to 18 Vac (Radio Shack 273-1514 or equivalent)
VR1–1N4743A, 13-V, 1-W zener diode
Simple voltage regulated power supply.
F I G U R E 6 . 1 3
220 CHAPTER SIX
a different zener diode. For example, output voltages of approximately
5, 6, 9, 15, and 18 volts can be obtained with zener diodes rated at 6, 7,
10, 16, and 19 volts, respectively. If the lower voltages of 5 to 9 volts are
the maximum that will be required, a power transformer with a sec-
ondary rating of 12 Vac at 1.2 to 2 amperes can be substituted for the 18-
volt transformer.
The power supply in Fig. 6.13 can be constructed using point-to-
point wiring, perforated board, or a “home-brew” printed-circuit
board, whichever is most convenient. The only critical item is an
appropriate heat sink for the power transistor. The heat sink can be
fabricated from a small aluminum bracket or obtained from a local
electronics parts supplier.
The zener-follower voltage regulator provides good regulation
characteristics with minimum ac ripple voltage for low to medium
load current. The disadvantages of this type of regulator are poor per-
formance characteristics with high load current and lack of short-cir-
cuit protection. The power transistor can be destroyed if a short is
placed across the output terminals. Some-
times a damaged power transistor will
have a collector-to-emitter short, causing
the entire dc output voltage to appear
across the load. This resulting 20 to 25
volts dc can damage ham equipment such
as a QRP rig designed to operate from 12
to 14 volts dc.
SERIES-PARALLEL VOLTAGE
REGULATORS
The series-parallel voltage regulator uses a
series-pass transistor controlled by a par-
allel-connected transistor that senses the
output voltage to provide automatic cor-
rective action. Figure 6.14 illustrates this
type of regulator circuit. Transistor Q2 is a
dc amplifier controlled by a small portion
of the output voltage. A voltage-reference
or zener diode, VR1, maintains a constant
emitter voltage for Q2. Thus, the output
The basic series-parallel voltage regulator. (A) Posi-
tive series-parallel voltage regulator. (B) Negative
series-parallelvoltage regulator.
VIN
unregulated
input

R1
C1
Q2
npn
Q1 npn
VR1
R2
R3
R4

Q1 pnp
VIN
unregulated
input
 
R1
C2
Q2
pnp
VR1
R2
R3
R4
V OUT
regulated
output
VOUT
regulated
output
A
B
F I G U R E 6 . 1 4
POWER SUPPLIES 221
voltage sampled at potentiometer R3 is used to control the base current
of the series-pass transistor, Q1. If the output voltage drops due to
loading effects or power-line variations, transistor Q2 raises the base
voltage of series-pass transistor Q1. This causes the voltage drop, VCE,
across the series-pass transistor to decrease and, therefore, raises the
load voltage back to the required level. Conversely, if the output volt-
age increases beyond its intended limit, transistor Q2 lowers the base
voltage on series-pass transistor Q1. This action increases the collec-
tor-emitter voltage across Q1 and thus reduces the output voltage to
the specified value.
The regulator output voltage is held constant by the base-emitter
voltage of Q2 and the very stable emitter voltage determined by the
zener diode, VR1. The zener voltage for VR1 is normally selected at
about 6 to 8 volts because this is an optimum value in terms of tem-
perature stability.
Potentiometer R3 allows a wide control of the output voltage level.
This output voltage can be adjusted to a precise value, which remains
constant despite varying load conditions and power-line variations.
Fixed resistors R2 and R4 place safe limitations on the output voltage.
Both positive and negative series-parallel voltage regulators are
shown in Fig. 6.14. The primary differences are that pnp transistors
are used in the negative voltage regulator and the zener diode is
reversed. These voltage regulators provide excellent regulation char-
acteristics and very low ripple-voltage content. However, like the
zener-follower regulator, the series-parallel regulator does not provide
for short-circuit protection. A fuse in the input circuit of these regula-
tors will help to protect the pass transistor.
INTEGRATED-CIRCUIT VOLTAGE REGULATORS
A significant advance in solid-state power supply technology is the devel-
opment of complete voltage-regulator circuits on a single chip. These
three-terminal devices are available in a variety of voltage and current rat-
ings. Table 6.2 lists some of the typical IC voltage regulators currently
available.
In addition to providing excellent voltage-regulation characteris-
tics and extremely low ripple-voltage content, these regulators provide
short-circuit protection. The regulator automatically shuts down if a
short circuit is placed across the load terminals.
222 CHAPTER SIX
Figure 6.15 shows a basic power supply circuit for almost any
three-terminal IC voltage regulator. Any of the voltage regulators listed
in Table 6.2, except the 723C types, can be used in this circuit as long
as proper voltage ratings for the power transformer, bridge rectifier,
and filter capacitors are observed. Typical values for these compo-
nents are given in Fig. 6.15 and Table 6.3. Be sure to install the voltage
regulator on an appropriate heat sink. Otherwise, extended operation
at high load current will cause excessive heat to build up in the regu-
lator case and possibly damage the device.
TABLE 6.2 Typical IC Voltage Regulators.
Output Maximum Internal Free air Maximum
regulated load voltage Load power input
Regulator voltage current drop regulation dissipation voltage Package
type (volts) (amperes) (volts) (percent) (watts) (volts) style
309H +5 0.2 2.0 2 1.0 35 TO-5
309K +5 1.0 2.0 2 3.0 35 TO-3
78XXC +5 to +24
(Note 1) 1.5 2.0 2 2.0 35
(Note 2) TO-220
78LXXc +5 to +24 0.1 2 to 3 2 0.8 30 TO-39 or
(Note 1) (Note 3) TO-92
TO-220
79XXT –5 to –24 1.5 1.1 1 (Note 5) 35
(Note 4) (Note 6)
723C +2 to +37 0.15 3.0 0.6 0.8 40 TO-5
LM350 +1.2 to +33 3.0 2.0 0.1 (Note 7) 35 TO-3
Notes: 1. Available in specific output voltages of 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 18, and 24 volts.
2. Maximum input voltage for 7824C (24 V model) is 40 volts.
3. Maximum input voltages for higher voltage models: 78L12C/35 V, 78L15C/35 V, 78L18C/35 V, and 78L24C/40 V.
4. Available in specific output voltages of –5, –5.2, –6, –8, –9, –12, –15, –18, and –24 volts.
5. Estimated to be approximately 1.5 watts.
6. Maximum input voltage for higher voltage model: 7924T/40 V.
7. Internally limited—Maximum Input-Output Voltage Differential is 35 volts for –65 to +150° C.
POWER SUPPLIES 223
Figure 6.16 shows an internal view of a small 12-Vdc, 1-ampere
power supply housed in a 51
⁄4 × 3 × 57
⁄8-inch metal cabinet. The elec-
tronic circuit is wired on a perforated board having 0.1 × 0.1-inch hole
centers. The 7812 IC voltage regulator is mounted on a small angle
bracket, which serves as a heat sink. The pilot light consists of a small
LED and a series 470-ohm resistor connected across the 12-Vdc output.
A word of caution
The construction of ac power supplies requires that the builder exer-
cise extreme caution in assembling and testing circuits that connect
to the 120-Vac, 60-Hz power line. All exposed terminals or wires at
Basic circuit for power supply using an integrated-circuit voltage regulator.
S1
F1
1A
115
Vac
T1 ac
BR1

ac
2000 (*)
50 Vdc
C1
C2
0.22
50 Vdc
In OutU1
voltage
regulator
Ground
C3
0.1
50 Vdc

R1
1 K
1 W
VOUT
regulated
output
BR1–Bridge rectifier (See Table 6-3 for rating.
Individual silicon diodes can be substituted).
C1–2000 F or higher electrolytic capacitor.(*)Use a minimum of
3000 F for 9 V IC regulators.
C2–0.22 F Disc ceramic or mylar capacitor.
C3–0.1 F Disc ceramic or mylar capacitor.
F1–Fuse, 1A, 120 Vac
R1–Value can be increased to about 2.7 K for higher voltage outputs.
S1–SPST toggle switch, 120 Vac 2 A.
T1–Transformer (See Table 6-3 for required output rating).
U1–IC voltage regulator (See Table 6-3 for typical model).
F I G U R E 6 . 1 5
224 CHAPTER SIX
TABLE 6.3 Component Values for the Power Supply in Fig. 6.15
Power supply BR1 bridge Typical IC
output T 1 secondary rectifier voltage
requirements winding ratings ratings regulator
+5 Vdc, 1A 12 Vac RMS, 2A 50 Vdc, 2A 309K, 7805C
–5 Vdc, 1A 12 Vac RMS, 2A 50 Vdc, 2A 7805T (Note 1)
+9 Vdc, 1A 12 Vac RMS, 2A 50 Vdc, 2A 7808C
+12 Vdc, 1A 18 Vac RMS, 2A 100 Vdc, 2A 7812C
+15 Vdc, 1A 18 Vac RMS, 2A 100 Vdc, 2A 7815C
+24 Vdc, 1A 24 Vac RMS, 2A 100 Vdc, 2A 7824C
Note 1. Negative IC Voltage Regulator
F I G U R E 6 . 1 6
Internal view of a 12-Vdc, 1-ampere power supply.
POWER SUPPLIES 225
120-Vac potential should be taped to prevent accidental contact. The
3-wire-type ac plugs should be used so that the power line ground can
be connected to any metal chassis or cabinet used to house the power
supply. All primary power wiring should be fused with a fast-blow
fuse to prevent damage to the equipment. Remember, the 120-Vac
power line can be lethal. Electric shock can also cause burns or other
injury to the inexperienced amateur operator. After the photograph in
Fig. 6.16 was taken, the 120-Vac switch and the fuse holder were pro-
tected with electrical tape to prevent accidental contact with the line
voltage at these points.
This page intentionally left blank.
Semiconductor devices and vacuum tubes are used in electronic cir-
cuits to perform a variety of functions related to radio receivers and
transmitters. A typical amateur HF transceiver will contain up to ten
individual amplifiers and three to four oscillator circuits in addition to
modulators, demodulators, and other types of circuits. This chapter
covers the amplifier and oscillator, both in terms of theory and practi-
cal circuits. The remaining basic receiver and transmitter circuits are
covered in Chaps. 8 and 9.
The Technician Class license examination contains only a few
questions on electronic circuits. The additional material covered in
this chapter will help to increase your knowledge of electronic circuits
and help you to upgrade to a higher class of amateur radio license.
Definitions
Amplifier The amplifier is a device or circuit designed to amplify
a specified input signal to a required output signal. Amplifiers can
contain vacuum tubes, transistors, or integrated circuits as the active
amplifying element.
Audio-frequency (AF) amplifier The AF amplifier is a device or
circuit designed to amplify audio-frequency signals within the 20-Hz
Electronic Circuits
7
227
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
228 CHAPTER SEVEN
to 20-kHz range of the frequency spectrum. Audio amplifiers are nor-
mally operated in Class-A, -B, or -AB modes of operation.
Radio-frequency (RF) amplifier The RF amplifier is a device or
circuit designed to amplify radio-frequency signals of a specified fre-
quency or band of frequencies. Radio-frequency amplifiers can be clas-
sified as either tuned or untuned, and can be operated in Class-A, -B,
-AB, or -C modes of operation.
Class-A amplifier The Class-A amplifier is operated in the linear
region of its characteristic curve and produces an output waveform
with the same shape as that of the input waveform. Current flows in
the output circuit at all times resulting in linear operation.
Class-B amplifier The Class-B amplifier employs two transistors
(or vacuum tubes) in a “push-pull” configuration. One transistor (or
tube) amplifies the positive one-half cycle of the input signal while
the other transistor (or tube) amplifies the negative one-half cycle.
The bias for the Class-B amplifier circuit is adjusted to approximately
the cut-off bias level; no current flows in the output circuit during the
absence of an input signal. With an applied input signal, output cur-
rent flows for approximately one-half cycle in each transistor (or
tube). Push-pull Class-B amplifiers provide an output signal that is a
good replica of the input signal waveform as well as good operating
efficiency.
Class-AB amplifier This amplifier uses a push-pull circuit config-
uration, which combines the advantages of Class-A and Class-B ampli-
fiers, namely good linearity and excellent efficiency. The bias for this
amplifier is adjusted so that output current flows for slightly more
than one-half of the input cycle.
Class-C amplifier The bias for a Class-C amplifier is adjusted so that
it exceeds the cutoff bias level. This allows the output current to flow
only during a short portion of the input cycle. The Class-C amplifier is
essentially nonlinear but provides maximum efficiency of operation.
Preamplifier A preamplifier is an amplifier designed primarily for
amplifying low-level or weak signals. The output of the preamplifier is
normally fed into a conventional amplifier or a long transmission line.
The preamplifier might include specific frequency-bandpass or equal-
ization networks.
Resistance-capacitance (RC) coupled amplifier This describes a
method of coupling the output signal from one amplifier to the input
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 229
of a following amplifier. Figure 7.1 illustrates an RC-coupled ampli-
fier circuit. The input signal is coupled to the base of Q1 by capaci-
tor C1. This provides dc isolation from the input signal source.
Resistors R1 and R2 form a “self-bias” network that biases Q1 for
Class-A operation. The output signal voltage is developed across the
collector resistor R3. This output signal is coupled to the required
load by capacitor C2, which also serves as a dc blocking capacitor.
This prevents the dc supply voltage from being impressed on the
required load.
Transformer-coupled amplifier Transformers are used to couple
the output signal from one amplifier to the input of the next amplifier.
Figure 7.2 shows a two-stage transformer-coupled amplifier. Trans-
former T1 couples the input signal to transistor Q1 for amplification
and blocks any dc voltages from interacting between the input signal
source and the biasing network for Q1. Transformer T1 also acts as an
impedance-matching device, matching the input signal source imped-
ance to the input impedance of Q1. Transformer T2 serves as an inter-
stage-coupling network, matching the output impedance of Q1 to the
Resistance-capacitance coupled transistor amplifier.
Input
signal
C1
R1
R2
R3
R4
Q1
C2
Output
signal
C3
VCC
F I G U R E 7 . 1
230 CHAPTER SEVEN
input impedance of Q2. Output transformer T3 matches the output
impedance of Q2 into the required load impedance.
Oscillator An oscillator is an electronic device or circuit that gen-
erates a sinusoidal or nonsinusoidal ac waveform from a dc power
source. The oscillator consists of an amplifier with a positive feedback
loop from output to input. Frequency-determining components, such
as inductors, capacitors, resistors, or quartz crystals, are included in
the feedback network to establish the required frequency of oscillation.
Crystal The crystal used in oscillator circuits consists of a thin
wafer of quartz suspended between two metal plates. Acting as the
dielectric in a capacitor, the quartz vibrates when subjected to an
electric field. This vibration, in turn, produces an alternating voltage
across the metal plates. The frequency of this alternating voltage is
inversely proportional to the thickness of the crystal wafer. The fre-
quency and amplitude characteristics of the ac voltage developed by
the crystal are extremely stable and make possible crystal-controlled
oscillators with precise frequency control.
Crystal oscillator This type of oscillator uses a quartz crystal ele-
ment that determines the frequency of oscillation. Crystal-controlled
oscillators are used when an accurate and stable source of oscillation
is required. A crystal oscillator having only one crystal element pro-
Two-stage transformer-coupled audio amplifier.
Input
T1
C1
R1 Q1
R3
R2
C2 C3 C6
T2
R4
C4 C5
R5 R7 C7
Q2
R6
T3
C8
Output
VCC
F I G U R E 7 . 2
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 231
duces a single frequency of oscillation. If multiple frequencies are
required, a switching circuit can be added to the oscillator so that the
required crystal element can be switched into the feedback network.
Crystal oscillators can also be operated at harmonics or multiples of
the fundamental frequency of the crystal element. Figure 7.3 shows a
typical crystal oscillator circuit.
Colpitts oscillator The Colpitts oscillator employs a series LC tuned
circuit with a capacitive voltage divider in the feedback loop. The fre-
quency can be adjusted over a wide range by using variable inductor or
variable capacitors. The Colpitts oscillator is illustrated in Fig. 7.4.
Electron-coupled oscillator The electron-coupled oscillator, nor-
mally employing either a tetrode or pentrode tube, consists of a tuned
control-grid oscillator section coupled into the screen grid. The plate out-
put is isolated from the oscillator section, thereby minimizing the effects
of loading on the plate. Figure 7.5 shows an electron-coupled oscillator.
Basic crystal oscillator.
XTAL
R2
R1
C2
C3
C5
C4
Oscillator
outputR3
C1
VCC
F I G U R E 7 . 3
232 CHAPTER SEVEN
Hartley oscillator The Hartley oscillator uses a tuned tank circuit
with a tapped inductor in the feedback loop. One end of the tapped
inductor is connected to the amplifier input while the other end con-
nects to the amplifier output circuit. The Hartley oscillator is illus-
trated in Fig. 7.6.
Tuned-plate tuned-grid oscillator The tuned-plate tuned-grid oscil-
lator employs two separate LC tuned circuits, one in the grid circuit of
the amplifier tube and one in the plate circuit. Feedback from output to
input is accomplished by the internal plate-to-grid capacitance of the
tube. The tuned-grid tuned-plate oscillator is illustrated in Fig. 7.7.
Audio- and Radio-Frequency Amplifiers
One of the most important functions of transistors and tubes is that of
amplification. Signals on the order of a few microvolts can be ampli-
fied to levels of tens to hundreds of volts by the use of amplifiers.
Oscillator
output
RFC
VCC
C1
C2
L1
R1
C3
C4
C6
C5
Colpitts LC oscillator.
F I G U R E 7 . 4
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 233
The electron-coupled oscillator.
L1 C1
C2
R1
V1
C3 R2
C4
V
RFC
C5
Output
F I G U R E 7 . 5
Hartley LC oscillator.
C1
C2
L1
R1 R2
C3
Q1
VCC
Oscillator
output
F I G U R E 7 . 6
234 CHAPTER SEVEN
Such amplification represents gains on
the order of 1,000,000 or more.
Receivers use RF, IF, and AF amplifiers
to boost the weak signals collected by the
antenna to levels sufficient to drive speak-
ers, headphones, or other output devices,
such as radioteletype terminals. An IF
amplifier is a fixed-tuned amplifier usu-
ally operating at a frequency below that of
the incoming RF signal but well above
audio frequencies. IF amplifiers are
described in the next chapter.
Transmitters use RF amplifiers to boost low-level RF signals to high
levels. For example, RF amplifiers in Technician CW transmitters can
be used to boost output signal levels up to 250 watts if the maximum
authorized power is desired. Voice transmitters have audio amplifiers
to amplify the low-level audio signals produced by microphones to
levels required for modulation.
Basic Types of Amplifiers
Amplifiers are described in many different ways—voltage, current,
power, small-signal, large-signal, radio-frequency, Class-A (-B, -AB, or-
C), resistance-capacitance-coupled, transformer-coupled, and other
expressions intended to indicate operational characteristics. Amplifiers
can use vacuum tubes, bipolar junction transistors, field-effect transis-
tors, or integrated circuits as the active amplifying elements. The term
amplifier can pertain to a single transistor, or it might describe a com-
plete audio amplifier circuit consisting of many tubes, transistors, or a
single integrated circuit.
The ideal amplifier
The ideal amplifier is designed to amplify the input signal in terms of
voltage, current, or power. The input signal can be either dc or ac. Fig-
ure 7.8 shows two common symbols used for representing amplifiers.
Either type of symbol, triangle or rectangle, can be used to indicate a
voltage, current, or power amplifier. These symbols are used in block
diagrams and sometimes in schematic diagrams when integrated cir-
The tuned-plate tuned-grid oscillator.
L1 C1
C2
R1
V1
+V
C3
L2
C4
L3
RFC
Output
F I G U R E 7 . 7
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 235
cuits are involved. In some instances, the biasing networks are not
shown. However, in most integrated-circuit devices, the biasing net-
work is included within the chip and no external bias is required.
The voltage amplifier in Fig. 7.8A has an amplification factor, AV,
expressed as:
AV  (Eq. 7.1)
where
AV is the voltage gain
Vout is the output signal level in volts
Vin is the input signal level in volts
The input current, Iin, for the ideal voltage amplifier is zero. For all
Vout
Vin
Symbols used for amplifiers. (A) Symbol used for voltage amplifier. (B) Symbol used for
current amplifier.
Amplifier
V
Amplifier
VIN VOUT
VOUT
IOUT
IOUT
IIN
RL
load
Signal source
Voltage
generator
Signal source
Current
generator
RL
load
A
B
F I G U R E 7 . 8
236 CHAPTER SEVEN
practical purposes, vacuum tubes and field-effect transistors exhibit
this characteristic since the input resistance of these devices is on the
order of many megohms.
Figure 7.8B shows a current amplifier, typical of bipolar junction
transistors. In the ideal current amplifier, both the input voltage, Vin,
and the input resistance are zero. The bipolar junction transistor
approaches these conditions—the input base-emitter voltage (for the
common-emitter configuration) is on the order of 0.7 volt and the
input resistance ranges from less than 100 ohms to about 1 k. The gain
for the current amplifier is expressed as:
AI  (Eq. 7.2)
where
AI is current gain
Iout is the output signal current in amperes
Iin is the input signal current in amperes
Power amplifiers are designed to deliver output power in apprecia-
ble levels, usually one watt or more. The general expression for power
amplification is:
AP  (Eq. 7.3)
where
AP is the power amplification or gain
Pout is the output signal power level in watts
Pin, is the input signal power level in watts
The output signal power level can also be expressed as:
Pout AP × Pin  Vout × Iout (Eq. 7.4)
  (Iout)2 × RL
These equations can help you calculate the output power levels of
high-power RF amplifiers used in transmitters.
The Decibel
This is an excellent time to introduce the concept of decibels. Many
technical articles, books, and equipment specifications refer to the
(Vout)2
RL
Pout
Pin
Iout
Iin
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 237
gain (or loss) rating of an amplifier, antenna, or other type of electronic
equipment in terms of decibels.
The expression of gain (or loss) in terms of input and output quan-
tities is sometimes awkward or inconvenient. Calculations involving
several amplifier stages or other related circuits become complex
when using amplification factors. The use of decibels simplifies many
of these calculations.
Decibels primarily express a power-change ratio in logarithmic
terms. The decibel rating for an electronic device such as an amplifier
or antenna indicates the gain (or loss) of electrical energy from input to
output. This relationship is:
dB  10 log (Eq. 7.5)
where
dB is gain (or loss) in decibels
Pout is the signal output power in watts
Pin is the signal input power in watts
Because decibels represent a logarithmic dc ratio of two levels, the
gain (or loss) of several circuits connected in cascade is equal to the
algebraic sum of their decibel ratings. Figure 7.9 illustrates two ampli-
fiers and a filter network connected in cascade for amplifying a given
signal. The bandpass filter has a loss of 3 dB. The total gain of this cir-
cuit or related types of circuits is given by:
Total GaindB  Gain 1dB Gain 2dB Gain 3dB . . . (Eq. 7.6)
where
Total GaindB is the gain of the total circuit expressed in decibels
Gain 1dB is the gain of the first component in decibels
Pout
Pin
A typical radio-frequency amplifier consisting of two stages of amplification and a
bandpass filter.
Input Output
A1
10 dB
A2
6 dB
Bandpass
filter
3 dB
F I G U R E 7 . 9
238 CHAPTER SEVEN
Gain 2dB is the gain of the second compo-
nent in decibels,
Gain 3dB is the gain of the third compo-
nent in decibels.
In this example, the total gain in deci-
bels is:
Total GaindB  10 – 3 6  13 dB
The following two examples illustrate
use of Equations 7.5 and 7.6.
Example 1 The amplifier in Fig. 7.10 produces 12.5 watts of output
power when driven by an input signal with a power level of 0.75 watt.
Express this power amplification in decibels.
Solution
Step 1. Use Equation 7.5 to set up the initial step for this problem.
Step 2. Table 7.1 discusses the alternate methods that may be used to
solve for logarithms. The logarithm of 16.67 is found to be 1.22. Complet-
ing the equation in Step 1, the power gain in decibels is calculated:
dB  10 log 16.67  10 × 1.22  12.2 dB (Answer).
Example 2 T wo RF amplifiers, a transmission line, and an antenna are
connected as shown in Fig. 7.11. With the indicated gain (or loss) in deci-
bels for each component, what is the overall gain of this circuit? If 2
watts of RF power is fed into the initial amplifier, what is the RF power
radiated by the antenna?
Solution
Step 1. The gain or loss of each section of the circuit can be added alge-
braically to determine the total gain (or loss) of the total circuit. If quanti-
ties are added algebraically, the positive values are all added together
and the negative values are subtracted from this total. Therefore,
Total GaindB  6 10 3 – 2  17 dB (Answer).
Note that the total gain does not have to be equal to a positive number.
For example, if the loss in the transmission line was equal to –20 dB, the
total circuit loss would be:
Total Loss dB  6 10 3 – 20 = –1 dB.
An RF amplifier.
Input
0.75 watts Output
12.5 watts
AP
F I G U R E 7 . 1 0
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 239
A partial short in the transmission line could cause this problem.
Step 2. To find the net output power from the antenna, use Equation 7.5,
substituting the known values:
dB  10 log
17  10 log
log   1.7
To find the antilogarithm of 1.7, simply raise 10 to the 1.7th power, or
10 1.7
. A scientific pocket calculator or a mechanical slide rule rapidly pro-
vides the answer of 50.1. Continuing with the solution to this part of the
problem:
Antilog log   antilog 1.7
 101.7  50.1
Therefore, Pout  2 × 50.1  100.2 watts
(Answer).
Voltage and Current Ratios in Decibels
Voltage and current amplification ratios can be expressed in decibels
when appropriate. However, these calculations might be meaningless
Pout
2
Pout
2
17
10
Pout
2
Pout
2
Pout
Pin
The final two amplifiers in a transmitter connected to a transmission line and antenna.
Input
2 watts
RF power
Antenna
3 dB gain
Transmission
line 2 dB loss
A 2
10 dB
A 1
6 dB
F I G U R E 7 . 1 1
240 CHAPTER SEVEN
if input and output impedances are not identified. For the special case
of Zin  Zout (input impedance equal to output impedance), the actual
values of the impedances are not necessary when expressing voltage or
current gains in decibels.
The equations for calculating gain in decibels for voltage or current
ratios are:
dB  20 log , and (Eq. 7.7)
dB  20 log (Eq. 7.8)
where
dB is decibels
Vout is the output signal level in volts
Vin is the input signal level in volts
Iout is the output signal level in amperes
Iin is the input signal level in amperes
Two examples are given to illustrate the use of these equations.
Example 1 An audio amplifier with input and output impedances equal
to 600 ohms is used to amplify voice signals. What is the gain in decibels
if a 2-millivolt input signal produces an output of 5 volts?
Solution
Use Equation 7.7 to solve for the voltage gain in decibels.
dB  20 log  20 log  20 log 2500
The log of 2500 is found to be 3.40. Continuing with the solution,
dB  20 × 3.4  68 dB (Answer).
Example 2 A transistor amplifier produces a 2.5-mA output signal cur-
rent when driven by a 10-μA signal. Both input and output impedances
are specified to be 100 ohms. What is the current gain in decibels for this
amplifier?
Solution
Use Equation 7.8 to compute the current gain in decibels.
dB  20 log  20 log  20 log 250
0.0025
0.000010
Iout
Iin
5
0.002
Vout
Vin
Iout
Iin
Vout
Vin
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 241
The log of 250 is found to be 2.4. Continuing with the solution,
dB  20 × 2.4  48 dB (Answer).
Table 7.1 gives the logarithms for the powers of ten and their rela-
tionship to the exponents. A simple two-place logarithmic table is also
included. The Technician Class examination will probably not
include any questions on decibels or logarithms. However, almost all
experienced hams will discuss antenna gain or related measurements
in terms of decibels. You will find this concept a handy tool to be used
in your amateur radio hobby.
TABLE 7.1. Relationships between exponents and logarithms.
Logarithms of
Exponential form Logarithmic form basic numbers
104 = 10,000 log 104 = 4.00 log 1 = 0.00
103 = 1000 log 10 3 = 3.00 log 2 = 0.30
102 = 100 log 10 2 = 2.00 log 3 = 0.48
101 = 10 log 10 1 = 1.00 log 4 = 0.60
100 = 1 log 10 0 = 0.00 log 5 = 0.70
10–1 = 0.1 log 10–1 = –1.00 log 6 = 0.78
10–2 = 0.01 log 10–2 = –2.00 log 7 = 0.85
10–3 = 0.001 log 10–3 = –3.00 log 8 = 0.90
10–4 = 0.0001 log 10–4 = –4.00 log 9 = 0.95
The logarithm of any number is expressed as two separate quanti-
ties. For example,
Note that the characteristic for numbers above 100 is always equal to
the value of the exponent, or one less than the number of decimal dig-
its. An alternate way to express 2000 is 2.0 × 103
. The logarithm of this
number can be expressed as:
Characteristic Mantissa
Log 2000 = 3.30
242 CHAPTER SEVEN
log (2000)  log (2.0 × 103
)  log 2.0 log 103
From Table 7.1, the log of 2 is 0.3 and the log of 103 is 3.0. Adding these
two numbers provides the log of 2000 as being 0.3 + 3.0 or 3.30. In this
manner, you can solve for the logarithm of any number to about two
decimal places. For two-place numbers, such as 15 or 35, you can
extrapolate between the given numbers. For example, the log of 15 is
approximately halfway between the log of 10 and the log of 20. Solv-
ing this example with the aid of Table 7.1 is given as follows:
Log 10  log (1 × 101
)  log 1 log 101
 0.00 1  1.00
Log 20  log (2 × 101
)  log 2 log 101
 0.30 1  1.30
The log of 15 is approximately one-half way between the values of 1.00
and 1.30, or 1.15 (Answer). Solving this problem with a pocket calcu-
lator provides an answer of 1.1761. The error in using the simplified
approach is (1.1761 – 1.15)/1.1761, or about 2 percent.
The scientific pocket calculator provides an excellent means for
solving problems in decibels and logarithms. An alternate approach is
to obtain an inexpensive mechanical slide rule. Either device will help
you to sharpen your ability in solving electronics problems. They usu-
ally come with detailed instructions that will help you learn some
mathematical fundamentals.
Amplifier Power Levels
Amplifiers are normally designed to operate within specified input and
output signal levels. These levels are expressed in terms of voltage, cur-
rent, or power, depending on the type of amplifier circuit and active ele-
ment (transistor or vacuum tube) used in the circuit. In this manner, the
amplifier design can be optimized for maximum desired performance.
The small-signal amplifier is designed to amplify low-level signals in
the microvolt to millivolt range. These amplifiers must possess low
internal noise so that the low-level signals will not be masked. Design
engineers refer to this characteristic in terms of a usable signal-to-noise
ratio. In most cases, the amplifier linearity and gain stability character-
istics are carefully controlled to permit a wide variation of input signal
levels. Small-signal transistors or receiving type vacuum tubes, with
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 243
output load currents of a few milliamperes,
are normally used as the active amplifying
devices in small-signal amplifiers. The
small-signal amplifier is used primarily to
boost low-level signals to suitable ampli-
tudes for input to power amplifiers or other
related circuits. The small-signal amplifier
is rarely designed to produce output power
levels over one-half watt.
Power amplifiers are designed to
deliver large power levels to the intended
load. Audio output amplifiers and trans-
mitter final amplifiers are typical exam-
ples of power amplifiers. Generally
speaking, any amplifier capable of produc-
ing an output power of one watt or more is
classified as a power amplifier.
Both small-signal and power amplifiers
are used for audio and high-frequency
amplification requirements in receivers and
transmitters. Most high-frequency ampli-
fiers used for such functions as intermedi-
ate- or radio-frequency (IF or RF) stages
have frequency-sensitive networks to shape
the frequency response of the amplifier in
terms of single-frequency or bandpass oper-
ation. Sometimes untuned high-frequency
amplifiers are used in receivers or transmit-
ters for special-function stages.
Class-A, -B, -AB, and -C Amplifiers
Classification of amplifiers in these terms describes the relationship
between the input-signal waveform and the output-signal or load-current
flow. This relationship is established by the biasing network and the
input-signal amplitude. Figure 7.12 illustrates these four basic classes of
amplifier operation along with a summary of the basic characteristics for
each class. Any of the previously described amplifiers (audio/high-fre-
Basic classes of amplifier operations. (A) Input-sig-
nal waveform. (B) Class-A amplifier output-signal
waveform. (C) Class-B amplifier output-signal wave-
form. (D) Class-AB amplifier output-signal wave-
form. (E) Class-C amplifier output-signal waveform.
0 180 360
A
B
C
D
E
F I G U R E 7 . 1 2
244 CHAPTER SEVEN
quency or small-signal/power) can be operated in Class-A, -B, -AB, or -C
modes of operation.
Class-A operation produces a linear output—the output-signal wave-
form is equal in shape to that of the input signal. The output current
flows for the full 360 degrees of each cycle of the ac input waveform.
The efficiency of operation ranges from about 15 to 25 percent. In Class-
B operation, the output current flows for only 180 degrees due to the
biasing network. No current flows during the second half of the ac
input-signal cycle. This increases the efficiency of operation up to about
65 percent. The biasing network in a Class-AB amplifier allows a small
output current to flow in the absence of an input signal. The output-sig-
nal current flows for more than 180 degrees but less than 360 degrees.
The efficiency of operation is approximately equal to that of the Class-B
amplifier. The Class-C amplifier is biased beyond cutoff and allows the
load current to flow for only a portion of the time between 0 and 180
degrees. Efficiency of operation ranges up to 80 percent.
Class-A operation is used primarily for small-signal or power
amplifiers using a single amplifier device (tube or transistor). Class-B
and -AB amplifiers are normally used in a push-pull configuration for
power amplification in audio and high-frequency operation. Class-C
amplifiers are used almost exclusively for high-frequency amplifica-
tion such as in RF amplifiers.
Amplifier Efficiency of Operation
Efficiency of operation for amplifiers is defined as the ratio of useful
power developed by the amplifier and the dc power required to oper-
ate the amplifier, or:
 × 100% (Eq. 7.9)
Note that efficiency of operation is always specified in percentage. For
vacuum tubes, efficiency of operation is defined as plate efficiency
and the dc input power is simply plate voltage times plate current. An
example is given to illustrate Equation 7.9.
Example A vacuum-tube RF amplifier delivers 50 watts of power when
the plate voltage is 400 Vdc and the plate current is 200 mA. What is the
plate efficiency of this amplifier?
Signal Output Power in Watts
dc Input Power in Watts
Efficiency of
Operation
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 245
Solution
Step A. Determine the dc input power
dc Input Power  Plate Voltage × Plate Current
 400 × 0.2  80 watts
Step B. Use Equation 7.9 to calculate the plate efficiency:
Plate Efficiency  × 100%
 × 100%  0.625 × 100%
 62.5%
Interstage Coupling Techniques
When large amounts of gain are required for specified applications, two
or more amplifiers can be connected in a cascade configuration. Figure
7.13 shows a basic cascade amplifier consisting of three individual
amplifier stages and two coupling networks.
Four basic types of coupling circuits are used in amateur radio equip-
ment. All of these coupling techniques can be used with both audio and
high-frequency amplifiers. Many amateur HF SSB transceivers use all
four types of coupling in audio, IF, or RF amplifier circuits.
Direct coupling
As implied, the output signal from one stage is directly coupled to the
input of the next stage. Figure 7.14A shows a two-stage, direct-cou-
pled transistor amplifier. This type of coupling provides a wide fre-
quency response and is used in dc amplifiers as well as ac or signal
amplifiers. Note that the biasing of Q2 depends on the dc voltage level
at the collector Q.
50 watts
80 watts
Signal Output Power in Watts
dc Input Power in Watts
Three cascaded amplifiers with coupling networks.
Input OutputA 1 A2 A3
Coupling
network
No. 1
Coupling
network
No. 2
F I G U R E 7 . 1 3
246 CHAPTER SEVEN
Basic methods for coupling amplifiers. (A) Direct-coupled amplifier. (B) Resistance-
capacitance coupled amplifier. (C) Transformer-coupled amplifier. (D) Impedance-cou-
pled amplifier.
Input
Output
Q1 Q2
VCC
Output Input
Q1 Q2
VCC
CC
Input Output
Q1 Q2
T1 T2
VDD
Input Output
C1 Q1
L1
L2 C2
C3 Q2 C5
L3 C4
V DD
A B
C
D
F I G U R E 7 . 1 4
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 247
Resistance-capacitance (RC) coupling
Probably the most widely used type of coupling in both vacuum-tube
and transistor audio amplifier circuits, this type of coupling isolates
the dc supply from each stage. This permits the use of individual bias
networks and allows replacement of defective tubes or transistors
without having to readjust the bias network for proper operation. Fig-
ure 7.14B shows a two-stage transistor audio amplifier using RC cou-
pling. Coupling capacitor CC allows the ac signal to flow from the
output of Q1 to the input of Q2, but blocks the dc supply voltage. The
primary disadvantage of this inexpensive type of coupling is an inher-
ent loss of gain when coupling between unequal impedances. For
example, coupling the high-impedance output of one common-emitter
transistor stage into the low-impedance input of a similar following
stage results in a loss of gain.
Transformer coupling
The transformer-coupled amplifier, illustrated in Fig. 7.14C, provides
maximum gain because the transformer acts as an impedance-match-
ing device. However, transformer coupling is limited in frequency
response and the transformer usually represents a high-cost item.
Transformers are usually used in IF and RF amplifier circuits where a
specific frequency response is required and gain is important. The
transformers also provide dc isolation between stages. In other words,
the dc voltage level at the output of one stage will not affect the input
of the next stage. Transistors Q1 and Q2 in Fig. 7.14C are n-channel
JFETs with source resistor biasing.
Impedance coupling
This type of coupling, shown in Fig. 7.14D, combines the frequency-
response characteristics of the transformer and the simplicity of the
RC-coupling technique. Impedance coupling is used in IF and RF
amplifiers where limited frequency response is required.
Transistor Q1 and Q2 in Fig. 7.14D are n-channel JFETs with
source resistor biasing. Capacitor C1 and coil L1 form the input cir-
cuit of the signal source. Tank circuit L2C2 is a tuned network, which
is normally resonant at the signal frequency. Coupling capacitor C3
provides dc isolation between Q1 and Q2. Tank circuit L3C4 is also
248 CHAPTER SEVEN
normally resonant at the signal frequency. Capacitor C5 is an output
coupling capacitor to the intended load. Note that each tank circuit
employs a variable capacitor for tuning to the required resonant fre-
quency. Many high-frequency circuits in both receivers and transmit-
ters use this type of coupling between stages.
Push-Pull Operation
Single Class-B and -AB amplifiers, sometimes referred to as single-
ended amplifiers, cannot be used for linear amplification due to the dis-
torted output characteristics. The push-pull configuration eliminates
this distortion by amplifying each half of the input signal with separate
dedicated amplifier sections. One section amplifies the positive half
and the other section amplifies the negative half. Class-B and -AB push-
pull amplifiers provide good linearity and efficiency of operation. Class-
C push-pull amplifiers provide even better efficiency of operation but
they are nonlinear. Class-B and -AB amplifiers are used as high-level
audio modulators in amplitude-modulated (am) transmitters and as lin-
ear RF amplifiers in single-sideband (SSB) transmitters. The Class-C
amplifier is often used in a push-pull configuration for developing large
amounts of radio-frequency power in audio-modulated (am) and con-
tinuous-wave (CW) transmitters. Additional information concerning the
operation of radio-frequency amplifiers is provided in Chap. 8.
Figure 7.15 shows the basic circuit for a Class-B push-pull audio
amplifier. Class-AB operation can be obtained by adding the appropriate
biasing network to the base of each transistor. Transformer T1 couples
the input signal to the base of each transistor in the proper phase. Note
that the positive half of the input signal appears as a positive signal at the
base of transistor Q1 and the negative half of the input signal appears as
a positive signal at the base of transistor Q2. Thus, the first half of the
input signal drives Q1 and the second half of the signal drives Q2 in an
alternating or push-pull operation. Transistor Q2 does not conduct dur-
ing the first half of the input signal while transistor Q1 does not conduct
during the second half of the input signal. The ac signal waveforms are
indicated for each transistor—the solid curved lines represent the ampli-
fied output of each amplifier section and the dotted curved lines show
the periods of nonconduction. Transformer T2 combines both halves of
the amplified signals from transistors Q1 and Q2, producing a complete,
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 249
undistorted output signal. Note that the output signal has been inverted
180 degrees with respect to the input signal.
A popular audio push-pull amplifier, made possible by low-imped-
ance transistors, is the complementary-symmetry amplifier illustrated
in Fig. 7.16. This configuration eliminates the need for transformers
and the low-impedance output can drive loudspeakers or other low-
impedance loads on a direct basis. Matched npn and pnp transistors
are required for this amplifier circuit. Note that biasing for this type of
circuit is critical.
Integrated-Circuit Amplifiers
Integrated-circuit (IC) amplifiers are being used in increasing numbers
in all forms of electronic equipment. Specific amplifiers are available
for many applications including audio and high-frequency devices.
Class-B push-pull amplifier.
Input
Input waveform
T1 T2
Q1
Q2
Output
V CC

Output waveform
F I G U R E 7 . 1 5
250 CHAPTER SEVEN
You can use these tiny packages in “home-
brew” ham rigs to perform a variety of
functions. Probably the most popular IC
amplifier is the audio-frequency type,
which contains a complete audio circuit
within an 8- to 14-pin in-line package. Fig-
ure 7.17 illustrates a typical circuit using a
377 2-watt, dual-channel IC amplifier.
The schematic diagram in Fig. 7.17A
provides details for a complete audio
amplifier. Resistors are rated at 1
⁄4 or 1
⁄2 watt.
The dc working voltages are given for all
the electrolytic capacitors. The IC can be
either a National Semiconductor LM377
or a Radio Shack RS377 integrated circuit.
The ground pins of the IC should be connected to a copper strip,
which serves as a heat sink. If the amplifier is assembled on a printed-
circuit board, sufficient copper foil should be left around the ground
pins to serve as a heat sink.
An IC Audio Amplifier for the Ham Shack
A complete audio amplifier for the ham shack, using the 386 inte-
grated-circuit device, can be assembled in a minimum of time. This
amplifier can be powered by a single 9-volt battery or, if desired, an ac
power supply can be incorporated in the circuit for 120-Vac opera-
tion. Figure 7.18 shows the amplifier circuit and the optional power
supply is shown in Fig. 7.18B. A photograph of the amplifier using
the 386 IC is shown in Fig. 7.19.
The amplifier and optional ac power supply can be assembled on
perforated board or on a “home-brew” printed-circuit board. If a per-
forated board is used, the audio-amplifier integrated circuit can be
mounted in an IC socket. Safety precautions should be observed when
assembling and testing the optional ac power supply. All exposed ter-
minals at ac line-voltage potential should be covered with electrical
tape. Be sure to use the grounding pin of the 3-wire ac plug. The other
end of the ground wire should be connected to the chassis or cabinet
of the power supply.
Complementary symmetry amplifier.
Input
C1
R1
R2
R3
R4
Q1
npn
Q2
pnp
C2
Output
VCC
F I G U R E 7 . 1 6
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 251
A two-watt dual-channel audio amplifier using a 377 IC. (A) Schematic diagram. (B) Pin
connection for IC.
Input No. 1
Input No. 2
500 K
500 K
2 K
5 F/16 V
100 K
470 F/16 V
470 F/16 V
0.1 F
0.1 F
220 F/16 V
2 K 5 F/16 V
1 M
1 M
7
6
1
9
8
Amp
No. 1
Amp
No. 2
U1
337
Dual channel
amplifier
100 K
2
3
4
5
10
11
12
13
14
Output No.1
8 to 16 ohms
Output No.2
8 to 16 ohms
V CC
10 to 26 Volts
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
14
13
12
111
10
9
8
Bias (both channels)
Output No. 1
Ground *
Ground *
Ground *
Input No. 1
Feedback No. 1
V CC
Output No. 2
Ground *
Ground *
Ground *
Input No. 2
Feedback No. 2
A
B
F I G U R E 7 . 1 7
252 CHAPTER SEVEN
The switch shown in the upper-right of Fig. 7.18 is used to control
the gain of the amplifier. It can be set to provide a gain of 20 or 200.
Note that a power switch is required for permanent installation. The
switch on the volume control (upper-left) can be used for this purpose.
This amplifier can be used to amplify the output from QRP rigs to
power a loudspeaker. The amplifier can also be used as a signal tracer
for servicing ham receivers, particularly the audio stages. If desired, an
RF probe can be constructed that allows signal tracing in the RF or IF
stages of a receiver. A recommended circuit for the RF probe is given in
General-purpose audio amplifier with optional power supply. (A) Battery-powered
audio amplifier. (B) Optional ac power supply.
2000 F
35 V
Input R1
10 K
3
2
4 7 6
5
8
1
S1
C1
10 F/16 V
U1
386
LS1
Output
8 to 16
ohms
250 F/35 V
C2
C3
0.1
R2
10
N.C.
S2
Power

9 V battery On-off

Hi-lo
gain
U1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Top view
Front
view
U2
1 2 3
120 V
ac
On-off
S3
T1 ac
ac
BR1

1 2
C4 C5
0.22
U2
7809
3 C6
0.1
R3
1 K
9 Vdc
output

A
B
F I G U R E 7 . 1 8
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 253
Fig. 7.20. The probe may be mounted in a
convenient housing such as a plastic tube.
When signal tracing in RF circuits, connect
the alligator clip to the nearest ground in
the circuit. You can then use the probe to
follow an RF signal through the receiver
and obtain a rough indication of the gain of
each stage. Remember, the RF signal must
be audio modulated. Otherwise, there will
be no audio signal to detect.
The Oscillator: An Amplifier
with Feedback
The oscillator, a vital circuit in all amateur
receivers and transmitters, is simply an
amplifier with a feedback network connected between the output and
input terminals. The amplifier can be operated in a manner similar to
that of Class-A, Class-B, or Class-C amplifier characteristics.
The function of an oscillator is to generate an ac signal having a spec-
ified frequency and waveform. Most oscillators in radio communications
equipment generate a sinusoidal or sine waveform. Oscillators can be
designed to operate at frequencies ranging from subaudio (less than 20
Hz) to the top end of the radio frequency spectrum. Oscillators employ
transistors or tubes as the active amplifying devices.
Photograph of an audio amplifier using the circuit
shown in Fig. 7.18A.
F I G U R E 7 . 1 9
An RF signal tracer that can be used with the audio amplifier circuit in Fig. 7.18A.
RF probe
Alligator clip
Housing
C1 D1
Insulated wire
Shielded cable (audio type) Audio
connector to
audio amplifier
C1 - 0.001 F
D1 - 1N34A
F I G U R E 7 . 2 0
254 CHAPTER SEVEN
The Basic Oscillator Circuit
Any oscillator can be reduced to three basic elements—an amplifier, a
frequency-determining feedback network, and a source of dc power. A
block diagram for the basic oscillator circuit is given in Fig. 7.21.
The amplifier section, either a vacuum tube or a transistor, pro-
vides sufficient gain to permit sustained oscillation. This means that
the ac output signal from the amplifier compensates for the losses in
the feedback network and provides a suitable input signal to the input
terminals of the amplifier. The amplifier can be operated in the Class-
A, -B, or -C modes of operation.
The feedback network contains inductive, capacitive, or resistive
elements—or a combination of these elements—for determining the
frequency. In crystal oscillators, the crystal element acts as a high-Q LC
tuned circuit. The feedback network, in conjunction with the amplifier,
must satisfy two basic requirements for sustained oscillations:
 An ac energy from the output terminals must be fed back to the
input terminals in the correct phase. Otherwise, the feedback
signal would cancel any ac input voltage and oscillation would
not occur. This in-phase feedback is called positive or regenera-
tive feedback.
Block diagram of the basic oscillator circuit.
Input
Frequency
determining
feedback
network
Amplifier
transistor or
tube
dc power
supply
Output
Typical output
waveform
F I G U R E 7 . 2 1
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 255
 The amplitude of the feedback energy must be sufficient to over-
come losses in the feedback network. The gain of the amplifier
must be adjusted to provide this additional energy.
For optimum performance, the oscillator requires a well-filtered
and stable source of dc power. For example, if the dc power contains
an excess amount of 60- or 120-Hz ac power (from half-wave or full-
wave rectifiers), this ac ripple signal will modulate the output signal of
the oscillator. Such an effect is readily noticeable on CW and radio-
telephone transmissions.
Oscillator Characteristics
Oscillators used in radio communications equipment must possess
adequate frequency stability and constant amplitude characteristics.
The radio-frequency oscillators used in amateur HF transmitters and
receivers are designed for frequency stabilities on the order of 100 Hz
or less for carrier frequencies up to about 30 MHz. This is equal to
about one part in 300,000 or variations of less than 0.00033 percent. In
many instances, crystal-controlled oscillators are employed to achieve
this extreme stability.
Oscillator amplitude stability, the ability of an oscillator to pro-
vide a constant-amplitude output waveform, is important in both
transmitters and receivers. The performance of other circuits within
this equipment depends on the stability of oscillator amplitude and
frequency.
The Tuned LC Oscillator
Many high-frequency oscillators that operate at frequencies above 20
kHz employ tuned circuits consisting of inductors and capacitors.
When connected in a parallel configuration, the LC circuit has a nat-
ural resonant frequency determined by:
fo   (Eq. 7.10)
where
fo is the resonant frequency in hertz
L is the inductance in henries
0.159
LC
1
2π LC
256 CHAPTER SEVEN
C is the capacitance in farads
π is 3.1416
Figure 7.22A shows an ideal LC tuned circuit that has no resistance
in the inductor or in the interconnecting wiring. However, all induc-
tors and associated wiring have some inherent resistance that dissi-
pates the energy in the LC circuit.
When electrical energy is supplied to the ideal parallel LC tank cir-
cuit, current alternately flows between the inductor and capacitor at a
rate corresponding to the resonant frequency given in Equation 7.10.
For example, if the capacitor is initially charged, it discharges into the
inductor. The resulting current flow through the inductor generates a
magnetic field. As the current drops to zero, the magnetic field starts to
collapse on itself. The electrical energy stored in the magnetic field gen-
erates a voltage that is equal but opposite in polarity to the original volt-
age impressed across the capacitor. This
voltage charges the capacitor. When fully
charged, the capacitor again starts to dis-
charge back into the inductor, starting a
second cycle of operation.
In the ideal LC tank circuit, these oscilla-
tions would occur indefinitely and would
produce a constant-amplitude waveform.
Figure 7.22B illustrates the voltage wave-
form from an ideal LC tank circuit. How-
ever, a finite amount of resistance exists in
any LC tank circuit. This resistance absorbs
power and causes the oscillations to eventu-
ally drop to a zero amplitude. This effect is
known as damped-wave oscillations and is
shown in Fig. 7.22C.
In addition to ohmic losses in the LC
tank circuit, the oscillator must furnish RF
power to other circuits within radio com-
munications equipment. The amplifier
portion of an oscillator supplies this addi-
tional RF power for overcoming these
losses and maintaining a constant output.
The LC tuned circuit used in oscillators. (A) Parallel
LC tuned circuit. (B) Ideal oscillations. (C) Damped
oscillations.
L C
A
B
C
F I G U R E 7 . 2 2
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 257
Oscillator Circuits
There are many types of oscillators that have been developed for spe-
cific applications. Let’s look at several basic types used in amateur
radio equipment.
THE HARTLEY OSCILLATOR
One of the earliest oscillators used in radio com-munications equip-
ment, the Hartley oscillator employs a resonant LC tank circuit in the
feedback network. Figure 7.23 shows a basic Hartley oscillator circuit
using an npn transistor in the amplifier section. Feedback is accom-
plished by the use of a tapped inductor which provides inductive cou-
pling from the output end of the inductor to the input end. The output
end of the inductor is connected to the collector terminal of Q1 via the
dc-blocking capacitor, C3. The other end of the inductor provides an
input signal to Q1 via dc-blocking capacitor C2. The oscillator fre-
quency is determined primarily by the L1C1 tank circuit. Capacitor C4
couples the output signal to the intended load.
Variable capacitor C1 allows the oscillator frequency to be varied
within specific limits. Oscillator circuits can be designed for a two-to-
one or a three-to-one change in oscillator frequency. For example, one
oscillator might be designed for a 3- to 6-MHz frequency range while
another design might call for a 3- to 9-MHz range.
Resistors R1 and R2 form a voltage-divider bias network for develop-
ing base bias for Q1. This bias can be adjusted for operation similar to
that of Class-A, -B, or -C amplifiers. Class-A type of operation results in
good waveform purity and the output signal is relatively free of har-
monic content. This type of oscillator is
used for the local oscillator in receivers or
for the master oscillator in transmitters.
Class-C type of operation provides the best
efficiency and is used when purity of wave-
form is not important.
THE COLPITTS OSCILLATOR
Like the Hartley oscillator, the Colpitts
oscillator was developed in the early days
of radio and uses a resonant LC tank circuit Hartley oscillator using an npn transistor.
C1 L1
C2
R2
R1 R3
Q1
C3
C4
Output
VCC
F I G U R E 7 . 2 3
258 CHAPTER SEVEN
in the feedback network to establish the fre-
quency of oscillation. A capacitive voltage-
divider network is used to feed a portion of
the amplified output signal to the input ter-
minal of the amplifier. In the Colpitts oscil-
lator, inductive tuning is normally used to
vary the frequency of oscillation instead of
variable capacitors. Although two variable
capacitors could be used in this circuit,
such an arrangement is normally not used
due to the need for ganged capacitors of dif-
ferent values. Figure 7.24 shows a circuit
for the Colpitts oscillator employing an
npn transistor.
The frequency of oscillation for the Colpitts oscillator, determined
primarily by L1, C1, and C2, is given by:
(Eq. 7.11)
where
fo is the frequency of oscillation in Hz
L1 is the inductance of the tank circuit in henries
C1 and C2 are the capacitance of the tank circuit in farads
A more accurate determination of the frequency of oscillation would
include the effects of the internal capacitances of the transistor and
stray capacitances and inductances in the circuit.
Capacitor C3 couples a portion of the ac output signal back to the
L1C1C2 tank circuit in the proper phase and amplitude. The voltage
appearing across C1 as a result of this feedback action is fed to the base
of Q1. This causes a second cycle of the ac signal to be amplified by
Q1. The base bias for Q1 is established by resistors R1 and R2 for oper-
ation similar to Class-A, -B, or -C amplifiers. Capacitor C4 couples the
ac output signal to the intended load.
The modified Colpitts oscillator shown in Fig. 7.25, sometimes
referred to as the Clapp oscillator, uses a series tuned LC circuit. This
arrangement allows the use of a single variable capacitor for changing
the oscillator frequency. Capacitors C2 and C3 are large in comparison
L 1 ×    C1 × C2
C1 C2 L 1 ×   C1 × C2
C1 C2
2π
fo  1 0.159

A Colpitts oscillator employing an npn transistor.
VCC
R3
R1
R2C1
C2
L1 C3
Q1
C4
Output
F I G U R E 7 . 2 4
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 259
to variable capacitor C1 and help to shunt
any effects of external capacitance such as
the base-to-emitter capacitance of the tran-
sistor. The frequency of oscillation is deter-
mined primarily by L1 and C1 and can be
calculated using Equation 7.10. This modi-
fied Colpitts oscillator is extremely stable
and is frequently used in amateur radio
communications equipment.
The Colpitts oscillator produces an
excellent sine-wave output signal both in
terms of constant amplitude and frequency
stability. This oscillator is used in receivers,
signal generators, and other applications
where a stable, variable source of high-
frequency energy is required. Colpitts oscillators can be designed to
operate as frequencies ranging from subaudio to the RF range of the fre-
quency spectrum.
QUARTZ-CRYSTAL OSCILLATORS
Oscillators that employ quartz crystals as the frequency-determining
element exhibit a high degree of frequency stability. Many types of
crystal oscillator circuits, using transistors or vacuum tubes, have been
developed for specific applications. Some of the most popular crystal
oscillator circuits are the Colpitts, Pierce, and Miller. These circuits
are generally used for fundamental frequencies up to about 20 MHz
and overtone or harmonic frequencies up to about 200 MHz. To
achieve higher frequencies in the VHF and UHF spectrum, frequency-
multiplying amplifiers are used ahead of the crystal oscillator.
The ideal frequency stability of conventional crystal oscillators is
about one part in one million, i.e., the oscillator frequency will not vary
more than 1 Hz in 1 MHz. However, crystal aging, changing tempera-
ture, and varying dc supply voltages will reduce this stability to about
one part in one hundred thousand (or about 10 Hz in 1 MHz). This
degree of stability is adequate for most amateur radio applications.
Because varying temperature accounts for most of the frequency
variations in a crystal-controlled oscillator, the crystal element can
be enclosed in a temperature-controlled oven. Most of the frequency
Modified Colpitts or Clapp oscillator employing an n-
channel JFET.
VDD
Q1
C4
RFC
C5
L1
C1 C3
C2 R1 C6
RFC Output
F I G U R E 7 . 2 5
260 CHAPTER SEVEN
variations can be eliminated by maintaining a constant temperature
within one degree centigrade. Some precision crystal oscillators
used in a laboratory environment feature temperature control within
0.1 degree centigrade or less. Frequency stabilities of these precision
oscillators will approach one part in one billion or better.
Quartz crystals. Small wafers or slabs cut from a block of quartz crys-
tal act as resonant tuned LC circuits. When used in the feedback net-
works of oscillators, these crystals generate a stable single frequency of
oscillation. The physical layout of a typical oscillator crystal and its
equivalent electrical circuit are given in Fig. 7.26.
Crystals exhibit extremely high values of Q (up to 10,000) and also
exhibit stable resonant-frequency characteristics. Each crystal oscil-
lates at a fundamental frequency or at specified overtone frequencies.
If different frequencies are required from the same oscillator, a sepa-
rate crystal for each frequency and a switching circuit is required.
The physical layout and equivalent circuit of a typical oscillating crystal. (A) Physical lay-
out. (B) Equivalent electrical circuit.
Air gap
Crystal
wafer
Air gap
Terminal
Metal
supporting
plates
Terminal
Crystal
terminals
C G
CM
L
R
C
A
B
F I G U R E 7 . 2 6
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 261
The frequency of oscillation depends primarily on the thickness of
the crystal wafer. The capacitance of the crystal holder and the associ-
ated oscillator circuit will cause the frequency of oscillation to vary
slightly. Standard crystal oscillator circuits have been established to
maintain an identical frequency when installing a replacement crystal
in the circuit. Also, trimmer capacitors are sometimes included in the
oscillator circuit to adjust the frequency precisely to the required
value.
In the equivalent electrical circuit shown in Fig. 7.26B, capacitance
C G is the effective series capacitance caused by the air gap when the
metal plates are not touching the crystal wafer. This capacitance is not
considered in some analyses of crystals. Capacitance CM is the capaci-
tance of the crystal holder and must be considered in the circuit design
of crystal oscillators. Elements R, L, and C represent the inherent elec-
trical equivalent of the mechanical oscillating characteristics of the
crystal wafer. The value of CM is much greater than that of crystal
capacitance C by a factor of up to 100.
How crystals work. Crystal operation is based on the piezoelectric
effect. When physically stressed, the crystal generates a voltage that is
proportional to the amplitude and frequency of the physical force. An
example of a device using this principle is the crystal microphone found
in some amateur transmitters. Sound waves striking a diaphragm in the
microphone cause it to vibrate. These vibrations are applied to a crystal
element that, in turn, generates an ac voltage proportional to the
amplitude and frequency of the sound waves. The reverse condition,
placing an ac voltage across the crystal wafer, results in electro-
mechanical vibrations or oscillations. The ac voltage generated by the
crystal can be used to drive the oscillator at the required frequency.
Many crystal materials found in nature or produced by commercial
processes, exhibit the piezoelectric effect. Three such materials,
Rochelle salts, tourmaline, and quartz, are used in electronics applica-
tions. Rochelle salts produce the highest piezoelectric activity, i.e., the
highest ac voltage for a given mechanical stress force. However, this
material is not suitable for crystal oscillator circuits due to poor tem-
perature, humidity, and mechanical characteristics. Rochelle salts
crystal elements are used primarily in phonograph cartridges, micro-
phones, and headsets.
262 CHAPTER SEVEN
Both tourmaline and quartz crystals
possess excellent operational characteris-
tics for crystal oscillator circuits. Although
tourmaline shows a lower piezoelectric
activity than quartz, crystals made from
this material will oscillate at frequencies
up to about 100 MHz. Tourmaline, a semi-
precious material, is rarely used in crystal
oscillators due to the high cost involved.
Quartz crystals are used almost exclu-
sively in crystal oscillator circuits. Quartz
crystals are also used in filter circuits at RF
or IF frequencies. This application is dis-
cussed in Chap. 9.
How crystals are produced. Crystal
wafers are cut from a block of quartz
crystal material in one of several
different planes or cuts. Quartz crystal
material in its natural form has a
hexagonal or six-sided shape as
illustrated in Fig. 7.27A. For reference
purposes, the crystal is assigned X, Y,
and Z axes. The Z or optical axis extends from top to bottom. The X
and Y axes, both at right angles to the Z axis, describe the orientation
of the hexagonal plane. The X axes pass through the hexagonal
points and the Y axes are perpendicular to the faces of the crystal.
Figure 7.27B shows a top view of the crystal and the orientation of
the X and Y axes.
Crystal wafers or elements are cut in many planes along the Z
axis or at various angles with respect to the Z axis. Each family of
cuts exhibits a particular set of operational characteristics in terms
of piezoelectric activity (or ease of oscillation), temperature effects
on frequency stability, and other factors. Some of the more common
cuts, the X cut, the Y cut, and the AT cut, are illustrated in Fig.
7.27C. For example, the X cut, which was developed in the late
nineteenth century, possesses high piezoelectric activity but is sen-
sitive to changes in temperature. The frequency range of the X cut is
Quartz crystal structure and cut orientation. (A) Side
view. (B) Top view. (C) Three of the more common cut
orientations for crystal elements.
Z axis
X cut Y cut
At cut
A B
C
Y X
Y
X
Y
X
YX
Y
X
Y
X
F I G U R E 7 . 2 7
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 263
approximately 40 to 350 kHz. The AT cut, on the other hand, pos-
sesses a low level of piezoelectric activity but exhibits excellent
operational characteristics in terms of frequency stability with
changing temperature and frequency of oscillation up to about 200
MHz. The AT-cut crystal is widely used in amateur and other radio
communication equipment.
Crystals are available with fundamental or overtone frequencies rang-
ing from less than 4 kHz to over 200 MHz. Many military and commer-
cial specifications have been developed to assure precise manufacture
and assembly of these devices. Crystals produced for the military and
other government agencies normally are covered by the CR-XX/U desig-
nators. CR stands for crystal resonator, and XX indicates the number or
letters assigned to a specific series of crystals. For example, the CR-5A/U
designator refers to a family of crystals with a frequency range of 2 to 10
MHz. Many commercial crystals can be referenced to an equivalent of
the government CR-XX/U designators.
Crystal elements are mounted or installed in a variety of holders.
The holders are designed for installing the crystal in special crystal
sockets or for direct soldering in printed-circuit boards. Again, almost
all types of crystal holders are covered by government specifications
bearing an FT-XXX or HC-XX/U designator. Outlines of some of the
more popular crystal holders are shown in Fig. 7.28. In some
instances, the type of holder indicates the range of frequencies avail-
able. For example, the HC-6/U holder might contain crystals with fre-
quencies from 200 kHz to over 200 MHz.
The frequency of oscillation is normally stamped or marked on
commercial crystals and many crystals produced for the government.
However, some government crystals can be marked in terms of chan-
nel numbers. Because these channel numbers generally apply to a par-
ticular radio set, it is difficult to equate channel numbers with specific
frequencies. Watch for this limitation if you plan to purchase surplus
crystals or “rocks.” Some typical crystals used in amateur radio equip-
ment are shown in Fig. 7.29.
The frequency tolerance for most crystals will usually be specified in
the range of 0.0005 to 0.02 percent. Tolerances for amateur crystals are
normally specified from 0.002 to 0.005 percent in order to reduce the
costs. Many crystal oscillator circuits include a trimmer capacitor for
“zeroing-in” the crystal frequency to the required frequency.
264 CHAPTER SEVEN
0.315"
(8.00mm) 0.721"
(18.3mm)
0.75"
(19.05mm)
0.236"(1.77mm)
0.486"
(12.34mm)
Dia. 0.050"
(1.27mm)
0.315"
(8.0mm)
0.721"
(18.3mm)
0.75"
(19.05mm)
0.445"
(11.3mm)
0.486"
(12.34mm)
Dia. 0.093"
(2.36mm)
Typical frequency range: 200 kHz
to 200 MHz
Installation: For installation in
two-pin crystal socket
Typical frequency range: 200 kHz to 20 MHz
Installation: For installation in two-pin
crystal socket or in eight-pin octal socket.
Note: FT-241 holder is similar in size
and has same type of pins for
installation in two-pin crystal socket
or eight-pin octal socket.
0.147"
(3.73mm)
0.40"
(10.16mm)
0.510"
(12.95mm)
1.6"
(40.64mm)
0.192"
(4.87mm)
Dia. 0.018"
(0.457mm)
0.315"
(8.0mm)
0.721"
(18.3mm)
1.516"
(38.5mm)
0.236"
(1.77mm)
0.486"
(12.34mm)
Dia. 0.050"
(1.27mm)
Typical frequency range: 4 to 250 kHz
Installation: For installation in two-pin
crystal socket.
Typical frequency range: 2.9 to 125 MHz
Installation: For installation on
printed-circuit board-soldered
connections.
A B
C D
Some typical types of crystal holders used in amateur radio equipment. (A) HC-6/U type holder. (B) HC-17/U
type holder. (C) HC-18/U type holder. (D) HC-13/U type holder.
F I G U R E 7 . 2 8
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 265
The Pierce crystal oscillator. One of the simplest oscillator circuits,
the Pierce oscillator is usually operated in the low and medium radio-
frequency ranges. This oscillator is used for applications requiring
moderate output power and good frequency stability. The ac output
waveform is an approximation of a sine wave.
Requiring no LC tuned circuit, this simple crystal oscillator is easy to
assemble and operate. No adjustments other than a trimmer capacitor are
required for proper operations. Figure 7.30 shows a Pierce crystal oscil-
lator circuit using an n-channel FET such as
the 2N3819. The crystal serves as a tuned
feedback network from the drain to the gate.
If no minor adjustment of the oscillator fre-
quency is required, capacitor C1 can be any
fixed value from 0.001 to 0.01 μF. The value
is not critical because the purpose of this
capacitor is to provide a low-impedance
path for the ac signal while blocking the dc
supply voltage from the crystal element.
The ac output signal is taken from the drain
terminal via dc blocking capacitor C2. The
Typical types of crystals used in amateur radio applications.
F I G U R E 7 . 2 9
The Pierce crystal oscillator.
RFC
C1
XTAL
R1
G Q1D
S
C2
Output
VDD
F I G U R E 7 . 3 0
266 CHAPTER SEVEN
value of this capacitor should be approxi-
mately 50 to 100 pF for minimal loading
effects on the oscillating circuit. The gate
bias resistor, R1, can range from approxi-
mately 47 k to 100 k. The radio-frequency
choke (RFC) isolates the oscillator from the
dc power supply and is normally 2.5 mH.
The Colpitts crystal oscillator. The Col-
pitts crystal oscillator, illustrated in Fig.
7.31, is an excellent high-frequency oscil-
lator with extremely stable frequency
characteristics. This circuit is used at low,
medium, and high radio frequencies for receiver local oscillators,
transmitter master oscillators, and other applications requiring stable
operating frequencies.
The ac feedback circuit consists of the capacitive voltage
divider, C2 and C3, and the crystal element. A portion of the ac sig-
nal developed at the collector of Q1 provides regenerative feedback
to the emitter. The amplitude of this ac feedback signal is deter-
mined by the ratio of C2 and C3. The resonant-frequency character-
istics of the crystal controls the frequency of the ac signal
developed at the collector. The ac output signal is taken from the
collector terminal via dc blocking capacitor C4. Resistors R1, R2,
and R E establish the operating bias for the base of Q1. Although a
bipolar npn transistor is used in this circuit, FETs or vacuum tubes
can be used in the Colpitts crystal oscillator with appropriate cir-
cuit changes.
The Miller crystal oscillator. The Miller
crystal oscillator, popular with many
designers and builders of amateur radio
equipment, provides high signal output
power with low crystal excitation current.
Used with either vacuum-tube or transis-
tor crystal oscillator circuits, the excita-
tion or feedback current is extremely small
and results in more reliable operation.
The colpitts crystal oscillator.
R1
R2
C1 C3
C2
Q1
RFC
RE
VCC
C4
XTAL Output
F I G U R E 7 . 3 1
The Miller crystal oscillator.
XTAL R1
GQ1D
S
R2
C1
C2
VDD
L1 L2
Output
F I G U R E 7 . 3 2
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS 267
This oscillator circuit is often used with overtone crystals for frequen-
cies well above 20 MHz.
The Miller crystal oscillator, illustrated in Fig. 7.32, employs an LC
tuned network in the output circuit. For proper operation, the L1 C1
tuned circuit is tuned to a frequency slightly higher than the resonant
frequency of the crystal. Link coupling, L2, is used to inductively cou-
ple the output of the oscillator to the required load.
This page intentionally left blank.
The radio transmitter, one of the basic pieces of equipment in the
amateur radio station, generates signals at frequencies in the ama-
teur bands. When coupled to a transmission line and antenna, this
energy produces electromagnetic radiation, or “radio waves.” Trans-
mitters may be simple or complex, single band or multiband, and have
a variety of modulation schemes [continuous wave (CW), amplitude
modulation, single sideband, frequency modulation, or a combination
thereof].
Radio transmitters, as well as radio receivers, are generally classi-
fied in terms of the frequency bands they cover. For example, a trans-
mitter designed to operate in the HF band, 3 to 30 MHz, requires
design and construction techniques that are generally different than
those used in VHF and UHF frequency bands. As a rule, construction
of HF transmitters and receivers are easy when compared to those
operating in the VHF and higher bands. The reason for this is that the
size of components and length of interconnecting conductors become
smaller as the radio frequency of operation increases. Finally, at
microwave frequencies, the size of components and interconnecting
wires is so small that special construction techniques are required. In
general, the beginning amateur operator can learn to construct and
operate simple HF transmitters and receivers. Fortunately, these sim-
ple radios can operate in the popular CW HF bands in the QRP, or
Introduction to Radio
Transmitters
8
269
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
270 CHAPTER EIGHT
low-power mode. Many amateurs employ low-power rigs (5 watts or
lower) to make long-range contacts over thousands of miles.
Radio transmitters suitable for Technician Class operation in HF
bands may range from simple, low-power, crystal-controlled rigs to the
more elaborate transceivers. Power outputs of low-power transmitters
will vary from less than 1 watt to about 10 watts while the high-power
transceivers range from about 50 to 300 watts. Older types of equip-
ment employ vacuum tubes or a combination of tubes and transistors
to perform the functions of oscillation, amplification, and modulation.
Most new amateur radios are fully solid-state and are generally
designed for 12-V dc operation.
You have a number of options for “getting on the air.” Many designs
for simple “home-brew” CW/phone transmitters and receivers are
available in amateur publications, such as handbooks and magazines.
Transmitters and transceivers, many in kit form, are available from
amateur radio suppliers. The Ramsey Model QRP-40 40-Meter Trans-
mitter, shown in Fig. 8.1, is available in kit form for easy construction.
Building this kit can provide good experi-
ence. Figure 8.2 shows a simple, easy-to-
build HF receiver kit that covers the
80-meter, 40-meter, 30-meter and WWV,
20-meter, and 15-meter bands. After you
finish this type of kit, you may want to
investigate transceiver kits for other ama-
teur bands on HF and VHF bands. With
these simple “home-brew” radios at a low
investment, you can get on the air with
either HF Morse code or 2-meter FM com-
munications capability.
Used amateur radio equipment is
another excellent and inexpensive way to
assemble an amateur radio station. You
will find many good bargains through the
local amateur radio club, swap-fests, ham
auctions, and amateur radio conventions.
In some instances, however, you may have
to repair or rebuild used equipment for
proper operation. Experienced hams at
The Ramsey Model QRP-40, 40-Meter (7-MHz) CW
Transmitter. This 1-watt, 40-meter CW transmitter
features two-channels (a choice of two transmitting
frequencies), crystal controlled with variable tuning
of up to 5-kHz around each crystal; a built-in antenna
transmit-receive switch; and operation from an exter-
nal 12 Vdc power supply (or batteries). This versatile
transmitter is available in kit form from Ramsey Elec-
tronics, Inc. Ramsey electronics, Inc., 793 Canning Park-
way, Victor, NY 14564, Telephone: (716) 924-4560
F I G U R E 8 . 1
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 271
most amateur radio clubs will be glad to help you with technical prob-
lems or loan you an instruction manual or schematic for the used
equipment. Also, most amateur radio journals carry advertisements
listing used amateur radio equipment. Many of the companies
involved will check out and repair all used equipment before it is
offered for sale.
Another option for assembling your amateur radio station is the
purchase of new equipment. Many excellent HF transceivers are avail-
able from such companies as Kenwood USA, ICOM, MFJ Enterprises,
Ten-Tec, Yaesu, and others. Most of the equipment produced by these
companies is capable of single-sideband operation as well as CW—this
is a vital factor when the Technician upgrades to General or higher
class license.
The No-Code Technician Class ham will be interested in amateur
equipment for operation above 50 MHz. Many VHF and UHF radios
are available on the amateur market, both new and used. A modern
Twin-Band 2-Meter Handheld radio is shown in Fig. 8.3. Comparable
mobile radios are available for portable operation or for installation in
The MFJ World Band Radio, Model MFJ-8100. This high performance “short wave” radio
is available in kit form for a modest price. In addition to covering the following hf ama-
teur bands (80m, 40f, 30 m, 20m, and 15m), the radio provodes coverage on other
international frequencies and the WWV and WWVH time standard stations. This radio in
kit form helps the beginner to become familiar with electronic construction practices
and testing of electronic circuits
F I G U R E 8 . 2
272 CHAPTER EIGHT
automobiles or other vehicles. Also, some
companies offer “full-mode” radios which
cover all forms of modulation (CW, SSB
phone, FM repeater and packet operation,
and split-frequency operation for amateur
satellites).
This chapter will cover the basic types
of radio transmitters with particular
emphasis on the CW transmitter. More
advanced amateur radio publications are
available for specific information of
radiotelephone or voice transmitters.
Definitions
Amplitude modulation Amplitude
modulation (AM) is the process of vary-
ing the amplitude of the carrier radio
wave in proportion to the modulating
signal. The information being conveyed
by the transmitted radio signal, normally
CW-coded signals or voice, is directly
related to changes in amplitude of the RF
signal. Amplitude modulation includes
CW, tone modulation, double-sideband
modulation, and single-sideband sup-
pressed-carrier modulation.
Backwave Backwave is defined as
residual or feed-through radiation from
the master oscillator when the final RF
amplifier is not keyed to the transmit mode. In some transmitters, the
master oscillator is left on during receive as well as transmit modes to
improve stability. If the final amplifier stage is not properly neutral-
ized, some of the energy from the master oscillator may be fed through
the final amplifier stage and cause a weak signal to be radiated from
the antenna.
The Standard C528A Twin Band FM Hand-held 2-Meter
and 440-MHz Transceiver. This versatile radio covers
the amateur 144–148 MHz and 438–450 MHz bands,
providing FM communications for both simplex and
repeater operation. The features packed into this
tiny radio include 40 memory channels, cross-band
operation between 2-meter and 70-centimeter fre-
quencies, subaudible tone (CTCSS) for both encode
and decode functions, DTMF “touch dial tones” for
phone patch operation, and receiver tuning ranges of
130–174 MHz and 248–479 MHz. Standard Radio Prod-
ucts, Inc., P.O. Box 48480, Niles, Il 60648, Telephone:
(312) 763-0081
F I G U R E 8 . 3
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 273
Band-pass filter A circuit that passes a signal band of frequencies
and blocks signals with frequencies below and above the band-pass
limits.
Continuous-wave modulation Referred to as CW modulation, this
type of radio transmission conveys information by keying the carrier
wave on and off. Thus, the keyed dits and dahs are used to form char-
acters of the International Morse code set. Sometimes CW modulation
is called radiotelegraphy, a term left over from the early days of radio.
Crystal oscillator An RF oscillator that uses a piezoelectric crys-
tal to control the frequency of the oscillator within very accurate lim-
its. See Chap. 7 for more details.
CW CW, or continuous wave, is the name for emissions produced
by switching a transmitter’s output on and off.
Detector A circuit (or stage) in a receiver that detects the audio
modulating component of an RF modulated signal. A detector is found
in every receiver.
Deviation Usually refers to a frequency deviation of the carrier
signal as produced by an FM transmitter. Over-deviation of an FM
transmitter’s carrier can produce “out-of-channel” emissions.
Frequency discriminator A circuit used in an FM receiver to
produce an audio signal contained in the FM-modulated RF carrier
signal.
Frequency modulation Commonly referred to as FM, this is a
process whereby the frequency of the carrier wave is varied in accor-
dance with the instantaneous amplitude of the modulating signal. The
frequency of the modulating signal determines the rate or number of
times that the carrier frequency varies each second. Frequency-modu-
lation modes used in amateur radio include frequency-shift telegraphy
and radiotelephone.
Frequency stability As related to transmitters, frequency stability
describes the ability to maintain a constant carrier frequency under
such conditions as on-off keying, varying power-line voltages, and
changes in temperature. For example, poor frequency stability in CW
transmitters reduces intelligibility of copy and may cause out-of-band
transmissions.
Harmonic radiation Harmonic radiation is an undesired signal
produced in transmitters. The frequency of the harmonic radiation
274 CHAPTER EIGHT
may be a multiple of the fundamental or desired signal. Modern HF
transmitters usually have a built-in low-pass filter in their RF output
circuits.
Key chirps Usually caused by poor frequency stability, key chirps
occur as a result of changes in the carrier frequency when the trans-
mitter is keyed on. The sound of the CW signal has a distinct “chirp”
at the instant the transmitter is keyed. In order to minimize or elimi-
nate this problem, some CW transmitters are designed with a constant-
on “free-running” RF oscillator and the carrier wave is keyed on and
off in the RF amplifier stages.
Key clicks Unlike key chirps, key-click problems are encountered
primarily with switching on and off the RF amplifier stages. This sud-
den transition from off to on and from on to off can cause annoying
transient signals to appear on the carrier wave. Usually, key clicks can
be eliminated with a key-click filter installed across the key terminals.
A related problem in keying some CW transmitters is that of uninten-
tional radiation of a small portion of the carrier wave during key-up
conditions. This is caused by a small amount of the RF energy from the
RF oscillator leaking through the unkeyed RF amplifier stages to the
antenna terminals. Adequate RF shielding, decoupling networks, and
proper neutralization of the first RF amplifier will generally clear up
this type of problem.
Modulation A term used to describe the process of combining an
information signal (such as a voice or phone) with a radio signal.
Phone emissions This refers to telephony or voice signals usually
transmitted as AM, FM, or SSB emissions.
Product detector A circuit used in a single-sideband (SSB)
receiver to detect or demodulate the SSB signal to produce an audio
signal.
RF amplifier An integral part of most transmitters, one or more
RF amplifiers are used to boost the power of the carrier wave to usable
levels. The RF amplifier may use tubes, transistors, or a combination
of both as the active amplifying devices.
RF carrier The unmodulated RF signal or wave generated by a
transmitter is referred to as the carrier or carrier signal. Normally the
carrier is an RF signal of constant amplitude and frequency. The carrier
can be modulated either in terms of amplitude or frequency changes in
order to convey information to the intended receiving station.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 275
RF oscillator Sometimes referred to as the master oscillator, this
section of the transmitter generates the initial carrier signal prior to
amplification of conversion. Most transmitters employ a variable-fre-
quency oscillator for controlling the frequency of the output carrier
wave. Other transmitters use a crystal oscillator for the master oscilla-
tor function.
Single-sideband (SSB) signals Single-sideband signals may be
either upper (USB) or lower sideband (LSB) and convey the original
audio signal used to modulate the SSB transmitter. Normally, only
one set of signal frequencies, USB or LSB, is transmitted by the
transmitter.
Splatter interference sideband When a transmitter’s output car-
rier is overmodulated by the modulating signal, RF signals of other fre-
quencies, or “splatter signals,” are produced.
Spurious emissions Spurious emissions are those unintentional
radiations from electronic equipment such as transmitters, which can
cause interference to other electronic equipment. For example, an HF
amateur transmitter may inadvertently radiate interfering signals in
the television broadcast frequencies and cause television interference
(TVI). Usually the frequency of a spurious emission is different from
that of the carrier and may be completely out of the amateur bands.
Some spurious emissions can be eliminated by installing filter net-
works in the transmission line.
Superimposed hum Poor filtering in an ac power supply for a
transmitter can cause 60 or 120 Hz hum to be mixed with the output
carrier signal. The carrier signal is modulated with this low-frequency
audio signal and produces an objectionable sound to the listener. The
problem can usually be cleared up by installing adequate filter capac-
itors in the power supply.
VFO The variable frequency oscillator (VFO) circuit is used to
help produce the transmitter carrier signal output.
The CW Transmitter
Continuous-wave (CW) transmitters are used to transmit information
with a series of short and long pulses of radio-frequency (RF) energy.
To accomplish this, the transmitter’s carrier RF signal is turned on
and off by a hand or automatic keyer. These on-off transmissions
276 CHAPTER EIGHT
convey information in the form of International Morse code charac-
ters, a universal language among amateur radio operators worldwide.
The CW transmitter is relatively simple to build and operate. With
one or two transistors (or vacuum tubes), the Technician operator can
assemble a CW transmitter capable of contacting other hams at dis-
tances of hundreds to thousands of miles.
The earliest amateur transmitters, described in Chap. 1, utilized
spark gaps for generating damped radio waves. These old transmitters
sometimes produced only a few watts of power spread over a wide
band of frequencies. This caused considerable interference with other
amateur stations and commercial “wireless” facilities. The introduc-
tion of the vacuum tube resulted in constant-amplitude carrier signals
with good frequency stability. The development of crystal oscillators
and highly stable variable-frequency oscillators improved the fre-
quency stability of transmitters to a fine degree. Today, the transistor
has all but replaced the vacuum tube for generating RF energy.
A simple CW transmitter, illustrated by the block diagram in Fig.
8.4, consists of an RF oscillator, a hand key, and a dc power source.
Many amateur operators launched their careers in amateur radio using
a one-tube or one-transistor transmitter. Today, some amateur opera-
tors employ a single-transistor CW transmitter for challenging contacts
with other hams. For optimum frequency stability, these simple trans-
mitters are crystal controlled.
The one-transistor transmitter has the disadvantage of low power
output. Also, changes in loading effects from the transmission line and
antenna are reflected back into the oscillator circuit, which can cause
frequency stability problems. Even the swinging of the antenna in the
wind can cause changes in frequency.
The Master Oscillator Power Amplifier Transmitter
A significant improvement over the single-stage RF oscillator type of
transmitter is the master oscillator power amplifier (MOPA). This type
of transmitter, shown in Fig. 8.5, has separate stages for oscillator and
amplifier functions. Greater frequency stability as well as higher
power output can be obtained from this circuit. The RF power ampli-
fier isolates the RF oscillator from external loading effects in addition
to providing power amplification of the RF signal. An LC-tuned oscil-
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 277
lator can be used with this type of circuit for varying the frequency of
the carrier signal.
A schematic for a modified crystal-controlled MOPA CW transmit-
ter, developed by Ramsey Electronics Inc., is given in Fig. 8.6. This CW
transmitter, capable of providing about 1 watt of output power and
switchable in frequency between two crystals, incorporates a driver
stage between the crystal oscillator and final amplifier stages to
improve RF frequency and keying stability.
The QRP-40 VXO Transmitter is available
in kit form from Ramsey Electronics Inc.,
793 Canning Parkway, Victor, NY 14564
[telephone: (716) 924-4560; internet
address: www.ramseyelectronics.com].
The kit includes all required parts, includ-
ing a predrilled PC board and a complete
manual for assembly, test, and operation.
This PC board permits easy modification
of the existing circuit and/or installation of
additional circuits for later upgrades. A
plastic case and knob kit is also available
to house the transmitter for easy installa-
Block diagram for a simple one-stage CW transmitter.
Quartz
crystal
Frequency
determining
device
RF
oscillator
(Tube or
transistor)
Antenna
dc
power
source
Key
F I G U R E 8 . 4
The master oscillator/power-amplifier (MOPA) CW
transmitter.
RF
oscillator
RF
power
amplifier
dc
power
source
Antenna
Key
F I G U R E 8 . 5
278 CHAPTER EIGHT
Schematic diagram for the Ramsey Electronics Model QRP-40 CW Transmitter. This easy-
to-build CW transmitter provides about one watt of output RF power in the 40-meter
band. Ramsey Electronics Inc.
12V
R14
10K
C16
220F
228256 Q4
.01
C15 10K
R15
.01
R1
CW
10K
12V
.01
C1
D4
295
R2
1 Meg
295
D3
1 Meg
R3 L1
4 H
Y1
7040 kHz
S1
Y2
Your
choice
10K 10K
R5R4
330 47
C3 C2
.01
C4
R7
R6
470
100
Q1
C5
.01
C6
47
2N3053
R8
47K
Q2
7011
R9
100
12V
L2
RFC
J3
.01
C13
C14
.01
RFC
L4
12V
12V
J4
C7
3.9 H L3
C8
.01
270
R10
Q3
2N3053
.01
C9 D1
1N4002
L3
RFC
100
R11
R12
1K
D2
1N4148
R13
1K
12V
C19
.01
J2
J1
C10
.01
470
C17
C18
8201.5 H
L8
Receiver
Antenna
Power
Key
Driver
Oscillator
Tuning
Final
amp
Keying
F I G U R E 8 . 6
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 279
tion in your “ham shack.” (Figure 8.1 shows a photograph of this CW
transmitter with the top cover removed.)
Functional data taken from the Ramsey Model QRP-40 Transmit-
ter’s instruction manual shows the following circuit description:
Transistor Q1 is configured in a crystal oscillator circuit that can be
switched to two separate frequencies of operation. Switch S1 selects
one of two internally installed crystals. The R1/D3/D5/L1 varactor-
controlled series resonant circuit establishes the crystal oscillator fre-
quency. Adjusting R1 allows the crystal oscillator frequency to be
varied up to 5 kHz about the crystal frequency. This feature permits
you to adjust your operating frequency away from other existing sig-
nals on the air.
The output RF signal from Q1 is fed to the Driver Q2, which acts as
a buffer between the crystal oscillator stage and the final amplifier
stage. Q3 is a Class C RF amplifier that amplifies the RF signal to about
1 watt of output power. The C7/L6/C18 “pi” output network forms a
low-pass filter that matches the low impedance output of Q3 to the
antenna impedance of about 50 ohms. Diodes D1/D2, along with resis-
tors R11/R12/R13, and the L5 RFC “RF choke” form an electronic
transmit-receive switching network which switches the antenna to
either the transmitter or the receiver.
Dc power to the transmitter is applied through an electronic keying
circuit employing transistor Q4 and a biasing network. When the tele-
graph or hand key is pressed down to transmit the dots and/or dashes
of Morse code:
1. Q4 conducts 12 VDC to Oscillator Q1 and applies a positive bias
to the base of Driver Q2 through R8. This turns on the crystal oscil-
lator stage and applies a low-level RF signal to the driver stage. Q2
amplifies the RF signal and applies it to the base of the Q3 Final
Amplifier for amplification to about 1 watt of RF power. Note that
12 VDC power to the buffer and final amplifier stages is always
present, eliminating keying action which could produce clicks and
chirps.
2. Q4 also conducts 12 VDC through choke L4 to the anode of Diode
D1, thus conducting the amplified RF signal power to the antenna
through the low-pass filter section. The 12 VDC from Q4 also
280 CHAPTER EIGHT
applies a negative bias to the cathode of D2, which blocks the high-
level RF signal from the transmitter from entering the receiver.
(Actually, a tiny amount of power does reach the receiver, permit-
ting the operator to hear the transmitted signal and ensure that the
receiver is tuned to the frequency of the transmitted signal.)
3. When the telegraph key is released—completing the intended
transmission of each dot or dash of the Morse code—the 12 VDC
power is removed from the oscillator stage, the driver stage, and
Diode D1. This turns off the RF signals and opens the D1 diode. The
12 VDC applied to R13 can now provide a positive bias to Diode
D2, permitting the signals intercepted by the antenna to be applied
to the receiver.
Amplitude-Modulated Transmitters
The Technician Class operator is authorized single-sideband (SSB)
voice modulation on a portion of the 10-meter band as well as all ama-
teur modes of operation on 6 meters and above. The General and
higher class operators are authorized voice modulation modes on
specified portions of all amateur bands from 160 meters up. This
increased scope of operation is a powerful incentive for continuing to
improve your knowledge of amateur radio and upgrade to the General
Class license. In this chapter, we’ll look at basic AM and SSB radio
telephone transmitters for operation in the HF band and frequency
modulation (FM) transmitters used primarily in the VHF and above.
Conventional AM transmitters
Amplitude modulation is produced when the amplitude of a radio car-
rier wave is varied in proportion to a modulating signal such as an
audio or voice signal originating from a microphone. Figure 8.7 shows
a block diagram of an AM transmitter. The only observable difference
between the CW transmitter and the AM transmitter is the addition of
a speech or audio modulator, which is capable of varying the ampli-
tude of the output FR carrier wave. In fact, an “outboard” modulator
could be added to the QRP CW 40-meter transmitter in Fig. 8.6 for
phone operation. Although most hams today use SSB modulation,
some hams prefer AM phone on 75- and 40-meter bands.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 281
Here’s how the AM transmitter in Fig. 8.7 works. Note that the RF
sections of this transmitter (VFO RF oscillator, RF amplifier/multi-
plier, RF power amplifier) are similar to the MOPA CW transmitter
in Fig. 8.6. With the addition of a telegraph key circuit, the trans-
mitter in Fig. 8.7 is capable of either CW or AM phone operation on
all HF bands between 3 and 30 MHz. The speech modulator ampli-
fies the low-level audio signals from the microphone, producing a
high-level audio signal. This high-level signal is applied to the RF
power amplifier stage, causing the amplitude of the carrier wave to
be varied from nearly zero to about twice the amplitude of the
unmodulated wave. If the modulating signal is applied to the modu-
lation stage output circuit of the RF power amplifier stage, this is
referred to as high-level modulation. (High-level modulation for
RF signal produced
by the oscillator
Amplified
RF signal Amplitude
modulated signal
RF
oscillator
(VFO)
RF buffer
amplifier/
multiplier
Modulated
RF power
amplifier3.5–4.0 MHz
7.0–7.3 MHz
3.5–4.0 MHz
7.0–7.3 MHz
3.5–4.0 MHz
7.0–7.3 MHz
Low--level
audio signal
250–2500 Hz
Audio
modulator
High-level
audio signal
250–2500 Hz
Antenna
Microphone
Block diagram for an amplitude modulated transmitter for the 75-and 40-meter HF bands.
F I G U R E 8 . 7
282 CHAPTER EIGHT
solid-state transmitters is accomplished when the audio modulating
signal is applied to the collector circuit of the final RF power tran-
sistor stage.) Low-level modulation in solid-state transmitters is pro-
duced when the audio modulation signal is applied to the base (or
gate) of the RF power amplifier transistor stage.
The power level of the audio modulating signal for high-level mod-
ulation must be approximately one-half that of the carrier wave power.
For example, a 100-watt AM transmitter requires 50 watts of modulat-
ing power in order to produce 100 percent modulation.
The RF carrier wave power represents about two-thirds of the
total RF power being radiated from the antenna. The remaining one-
third of the RF power is contained within the two sidebands.
Because either sideband contains identical information relating to
the original modulating signal (i.e., the modulating signal such as
voice), the effective transmission of the voice information by single
sideband requires one-sixth of the original power. For all practical
purposes, a 20-watt single-sideband transmitter is as effective as a
120-watt AM transmitter!
AM carrier and sideband signals
The generation of AM signals results in a carrier wave and two identi-
cal sets of sideband signals spaced on opposite sides of the carrier-
wave frequency. Figure 8.8 illustrates the frequency spectrum of a
typical AM signal in the 80-meter band. The carrier wave frequency,
generated by the VFO, is positioned at 3923.0 kHz. Voice signal fre-
quencies from 250 to 2500 Hz are fed to the modulator for amplifica-
tion to the required power level. When applied to the RF power
amplifier stage, this produces sideband signals below and above the
carrier frequency. The set of lower sideband signals extends down to
3920.5 kHz. In terms of decreasing carrier frequency, the lower side-
band appears as an inverted set of frequencies, with the lowest voice
frequencies (around 250 Hz) adjacent to the carrier frequency. The
upper sideband extends up to 3925.5 and appears as a noninverted set
of voice frequencies ranging from the lowest frequencies (around 250
Hz) to the highest.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 283
Audio modulation requires a bandwidth of twice the highest
frequency of the modulating signal. For speech signals ranging up to
about 2500 Hz, the AM modulating bandwidth is about 5 kHz.
Single-Sideband Modulation
The disadvantages of AM modulation in terms of wide bandwidths
and power lost in transmitting the carrier wave and both sidebands
can be eliminated by single-sideband (SSB) transmissions. As noted
earlier, the transmitter carrier wave does not contain the information
being conveyed by the person talking into the microphone. All of this
information goes into the two sidebands. Thus, only one sideband
needs to be transmitted. This is the theory behind SSB transmission.
Up to a point, the SSB transmitter is almost identical to the AM
transmitter. A carrier wave and two sidebands are generated in the
initial stages of an SSB transmitter. Figure 8.9 shows the block dia-
gram for a filter type of SSB transmitter. The balanced modulator
stage removes or suppresses the carrier wave, leaving only the two
sidebands. One of these sidebands is removed by a very sharp filter.
The remaining sideband, which appears as a set of audio frequencies
converted to intermediate RF frequencies, can be heterodyned with an
Carrier frequency
Lower sideband Upper sideband
3920.5 kHz 3923 kHz 3925.5 kHz
Frequency spectrum for an amplitude-modulated signal.
F I G U R E 8 . 8
284 CHAPTER EIGHT
RF oscillator to produce the desired RF transmission frequency. After
sufficient amplification, the modulated SSB wave is fed to the antenna
for radiation into space.
The SSB transmitter in Fig. 8.9 covers the 80-meter amateur band
and produces a lower-sideband output signal. A fixed-frequency oscil-
lator, V1, generates an RF carrier wave of 456 kHz. Speech signals from
the microphone are amplified by the speech amplifier stage, V2. When
both the 456-kHz carrier wave and speech signals (nominally 250 to
2500 Hz) are applied to the balanced modulator, the mixing action
removes the 456-kHz signal and produces modulated lower and upper
sidebands. The lower sideband frequencies extend from 453.5 kHz to
455.75 kHz, representing the 250- to 2500-Hz speech modulating sig-
nals. Conversely, the upper sideband contains frequencies from 456.25
kHz to 458.5 kHz. Figure 8.10 shows the frequency spectrum of the
output of the balanced modulator containing the two sidebands. This
is a form of modulation known as double-sideband suppressed-carrier
modulation. If applied directly to the mixer stage (V4 in Fig. 8.9) this
Block diagram for a lower-sideband SSB 80-meter transmitter.
456 kHz 453.5 kHz 456 kHz 456 kHz458.5 kHz
Antenna
Converted lower
sideband tunable from
3500 to 4000 kHz
456 kHz
oscillator
V1
Balanced
modulator
V3
Lower sidebandOutput of
balanced modulator
Intermediate
carrier frequency
250 Hz 2500 Hz
Audio spectrum
Speech
amplifier
V2
Microphone
Single
sideband
filter
Sharp selectivity
of filter eliminates the
upper sideband
frequencies
Mixer
V4
balanced
Linear RF
power
amplifier V6
RF oscillator tunable from
3044 to 3544 kHz
RF
oscillator
V5
F I G U R E 8 . 9
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 285
would result in transmission of a double-
sideband suppressed-carrier signal. Some
of the earlier sideband transmitters
employed this mode of transmission.
When applied to the sharp bandpass
filter, the upper sideband is suppressed,
leaving only the lower sideband. Either
electromechanical or quartz-crystal filters
are used to obtain the required sharp band-
pass characteristics.
The lower sideband is heterodyned to
the desired frequency of operation within
the 80-meter band by the mixer stage, V4,
and a variable frequency oscillator, V5. In
order to cover the 80-meter band, the VFO
must be able to produce a signal between
3044 kHz and 3544.0 kHz.
For upper-sideband operation, the fre-
quency of the fixed frequency oscillator,
V1, is changed to 453.5 kHz. Many SSB
transmitters employ a crystal oscillator
for this stage with a capability for switch-
ing between two crystals to provide the
lower- or upper-sideband mode of trans-
mission. Changing this oscillator fre-
quency to 453.5 kHz shifts the lower sideband below the passband of
the sharp filter and centers the upper sideband within the passband
of the filter.
Operation for the other amateur HF bands (40 to 10 meters) can
be obtained by changing the frequency coverage of the VFO and the
tuned LC networks in the linear RF power amplifier. Most amateur
HF SSB transmitters contain switching networks for quickly chang-
ing to any desired band of operation. Figure 8.10B and C illustrates
the frequency spectrum of both lower- and upper-sideband trans-
missions.
The last stage of the SSB transmitter, the linear RF power amplifier,
must possess two basic characteristics. First, the input tuned network
must pass only the desired RF frequencies from the mixer stage. The
Forms of amplitude-modulated signals. (A) Double-
sideband suppressed-carrier modulation. (B) Lower-
sideband modulation (upper-sideband and carrier are
suppressed). (C) Upper-sideband modulation (lower-
sideband and carrier are suppressed).
A
B
C
F I G U R E 8 . 1 0
286 CHAPTER EIGHT
output of a mixer contains both the sum
and difference frequencies of the two
input frequencies. In Fig. 8.9, with the
VFO set at 3432.75 kHz, the mixer pro-
vides two sets of frequencies, one set cen-
tered at 3888.75 kHz and a second set
centered at 2976.75 kHz. The latter set of
frequencies clearly does not fall within the
authorized amateur frequencies. Figure
8.11 illustrates the action of a frequency
mixer.
The second characteristic of the RF power output amplifier is that
it must provide for uniform or linear amplification. Linear amplifiers
in subtransmitters are usually operated in Class-B or -AB modes in
order to obtain linear amplification.
The power output of SSB transmitters is normally specified in
terms of peak envelope power, or pep. This is a practical way to rate
SSB transmitter power because no carrier wave is radiated and during
conditions of no modulation, the transmitter does not produce an RF
output. Average power is difficult to measure due to the differing
characteristics of voice signals. Also, dc ammeters or voltmeters can-
not provide an accurate indication of the power output. An approxi-
mation can be made by multiplying the indicated average power by a
factor of two. For example, if the plate-current meter of an SSB trans-
mitter indicates about 100 mA during modulation with a plate supply
voltage of 750 volts dc, the average power input to the final stage is
approximately:
Pavg  VP × I  750 × 0.1  75 watts
The pep produced by the SSB transmitter is approximately twice the
indicated average power, or about 150 watts in this example.
The effective “talk power” of SSB transmitters is superior to that of
conventional AM transmitters with the same-rated power output lev-
els. In the example just given, the final RF amplifier stage has a power
dissipation of 75 watts with a peak effective power of about 150 watts.
An AM transmitter of similar power ratings will produce about 75
watts of power during periods of no modulation. When modulated,
the total power of the carrier and the two sidebands is approximately
Basic action of a mixer circuit.
Mixer
Input signal
F1
Output signals
F 1 F2 ,
F1F2 ,
F1 and F2
Input signal
F2
F I G U R E 8 . 1 1
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 287
110 watts. Only one-sixth of this power, or about 18 watts, is contained
in each of the sidebands. This illustrates the tremendous advantage of
SSB transmitters over AM transmitters. Along with the advantage of
requiring less bandwidth, it is no wonder that SSB is the most popular
mode of voice communication in the crowded HF amateur bands.
Most amateur equipment available for the HF bands consists of mul-
tipurpose transceivers, or combination transmitter and receiver units.
The transceiver combines the use of common circuits such as the mas-
ter oscillator and common RF, IF, and audio amplifiers. This makes pos-
sible a more compact unit as well as reducing the overall cost of an
amateur radio station. Figure 8.12 shows a modern, all solid-state HF
transceiver capable of CW and SSB operation over all authorized ama-
teur bands from 80 to 10 meters. The 100-watt peak input transmitter
power and sensitive receiver characteristics make this transceiver and
similar models popular with both beginning and experienced hams.
Specifications and pricing information on this transceiver and similar
equipment are available in most amateur magazines such as CQ, Ham
Radio, QST, and 73.
The ICOM 728 All-Mode HF Transceiver. This high-performance amateur HF transceiver
covers all the amateur bands between 1.8 to 29.7 MHz; the receiver section provides
general coverage from 30 kHz to 30 MHz. All mode operation includes CW, SSB (USB and
LSB), and FM modulation. Dual VFOs and 26 memory channels provide for split or cross-
band operation. Operating accessories include an automatic antenna tuner, dc power
supply, desk microphone, and a 500-watt HF linear amplifier. ICOM America Inc., 2380
116th Avenue N.E.; Bellevue, WA 98004; Telephone: (206) 454-7619
F I G U R E 8 . 1 2
288 CHAPTER EIGHT
Frequency Modulation
Another form of RF modulation used by amateurs is that of frequency
modulation (FM). Here the frequency of the RF carrier wave is varied
within limits by an audio (or other low-frequency signal such as RTTY
or data) signal waveform. FM provides certain advantages over AM
modulation systems. However, those advantages come at a price.
Radio communications via FM systems offer clear, noise-free recep-
tion of voice and other amateur FM signals. Even in the presence of high-
ambient electrical noise and interference, FM communications sytems
provide virtually crystal-clear signal reception. These characteristics are
ideal for amateur repeater operation in the VHF and UHF where many
ham radios are installed or used in automobiles and other vehicles.
Another teature of FM communications is the “capture effect.” An
FM receiver will always “lock on” to the strongest signal and ignore
weaker ones. This is excellent for a two-way contact with a ham
friend. However, it prevents another ham with a weaker signal from
calling you. This is the reason why airport control-tower operators use
conventional amplitude modulation radios for contacting and direct-
ing aircraft activity. In this instance, the control-tower operators can
hear weaker signals from more distant aircraft.
On the negative side, FM systems normally require more band-
width than similar AM systems. One reason for this is that the FM
modulation process generates a series of sideband signals extending
well past the frequency of the modulating audio signal. For example,
FM broadcast stations require a bandwidth of 150 kHz to transmit a
high-fidelity sudio signal of 50 to 15,000 Hz. This results in a / 75
kHz deviation. Amateur radio FM transmitters use a “narrow-band”
FM modulation system, which generates sidebands up to / 5000 Hz
when modulated by a voice signal with a frequency range of 300 to
3000 Hz. The total RF bandwidth required to transmit this FM signal
is given by
BW  2 (M D) Hz (Eq. 8.1)
where
BW is the required RF bandwidth
M is the maximum modulation frequency in Hz
D is the peak deviation in Hz
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 289
The wide-bandwidth FM RF signals become distorted when trans-
mitted via skywave propagation modes. This is due to the changing
phase of the different frequency components of the transmitted signal.
This limitation prevents use of FM modulation methods at frequencies
below the amateur 10-meter band.
FM transmitters
Modern FM transmitters employ several methods of generating FM
signals. A popular circuit is the “direct FM” modulator, which
employs a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO). Conventional LC RF
oscillators use an LC resonance circuit (refer to the “The Tuned LC
Oscillator” in Chap. 7). If the capacitance of the capacitor in the LC
resonant circuit can be varied by an audio signal voltage waveform,
this change in capacitance will vary the frequency of the RF oscilla-
tor. The amount of change of frequency from this circuit is relatively
small. By designing the VCO oscillator for a low RF frequency and
using frequency multiplier stages, the center frequency of the AM
signal can be raised to the desired VHF or UHF channel. Some FM
transmitters employ frequency synthesizer circuits to generate and
maintain accurate RF channel frequencies. A block diagram of a typ-
ical VHF modern FM transmitter is given in Fig. 8.13 for a simple,
single-channel VHF FM transmitter. Audio (voice) signals generated
by the microphone are amplified by the AF amplifier and applied to
the VCO. These audio signals cause the frequency of the VCO to vary
as a function of the original voice signals. The amount of frequency
change (or deviation) is a function of the voice signal’s amplitude,
and the number of frequency swings is a function of the original
voice frequency. The frequency changes at the output of the VCO
stage are small. Frequency multipliers (harmonic generators)
increase the VCO’s center frequency (eightfold in this example) to
the VHF channel’s authorized operating frequency (147.2 MHz)
while increasing the final maximum frequency deviation to 5000
Hz. In this example, the maximum output of the FM transmitter
reuqires a bandwidth of 16 kHz. Channel spacing and frequency
allocations for FM operation on the amateur bands are established
by a regional frequency coordinator group made up of amateur oper-
ators.
290 CHAPTER EIGHT
Transmitter Performance Tests
The FCC requires that all licensed amateur operators monitor their
transmitters to ensure that emissions are always within the authorized
frequency and power limits. This means that you must have the capa-
bility to determine the performance of your transmitter at any time.
This section covers some of the basic methods and test equeipment
used in checking the transmitter for proper operation.
Transmitter frequency measurements
Several types of equipment are available for determining the output
frequency of the transmitter. In addition, this equipment will help to
detect the presence of spurious radiation outside of the authorized
amateur bands.
An accurately calibrated HF receiver is one of the simplest
approaches to monitoring transmitter output signals. One way to
ensure the calibration accuracy of the receiver involves the use of a fre-
quency marker or frequency standard. If the receiver does not have
this capability, an external frequency standard can be assembled using
the crystal oscillator circuits described in Chap. 7.
A general-coverage receiver is useful in determining the presence
of spurious signals outside of the amateur bands. For example, a 0.5-
Block diagram for a simple, single-channel VHF FM radiotelephone transmitter.
VCO
(Voltage
Controlled
Oscillator)
RF
Frequency
Multiplier
 8
RF
Power
Amplifier
Voice
Amplifier
300 - 3000 Hz
Microphone
18.2 MHz 147.2 MHz Antenna
F I G U R E 8 . 1 3
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 291
to 30-MHz receiver is capable of tuning to spurious signals within this
frequency range. However, if the receiver is limited to amateur band
coverage, it cannot be used to detect spurious signals outside of the
amateur bands. Other means, such as an absorption wave meter, may
be employed for this purpose.
Frequency counters
The development of digital integrated-circuit chips, such as the 7400
TTL series, has made possible low-cost, highly accurate frequency
counters. When calibrated with the precise frequency transmissions
from the National Bureau of Standard’s WWV and WWVH transmit-
ters, the digital frequency counter can exhibit errors of less than 100
Hz in the amateur HF bands. Figure 8.14 shows a typical frequency
counter.
The sensitivity of most frequency counters is on the order of 50
to 100 mV (millivolts). This allows you
to check the frequency of the low-power
oscillator as well as other circuits.
However, the output of a high power
amplifier should never be connected
directly to a frequency counter. The high
RF voltages can burn out the input cir-
cuit of the counter. When making fre-
quency measurements on a high-power
amplifier, a small 2- to 3-turn coil can be
used to pick up sufficient RF signal volt-
age for the counter’s input circuit. Many
modern trnsmitters and transceivers
have an external jack for connecting a
frequency counter. Also, the newer
“hand-held”frequency counters have a
small whip antenna to “sniff” out the fre-
quency signals.
Frequency digital displays are now
incorporated in most amateur radios to
permit frequency monitoring. This per-
mits a continual display of the operating
frequency.
The MFJ Model-346 Frequency Counter is a precision
counter for measuring RF frequencies up to 600 MHz.
This portable, battery operated unit features a 10-
digit LCD frequency display within 0.1 Hz resolution
and a high accuracy of 1 ppm (parts per million). MFJ
Enterprises, Inc..
F I G U R E 8 . 1 4
292 CHAPTER EIGHT
Transmitter power measurements
Paragraph 97.313 (Transmitter Power Standards) of the FCC Part 97
Rules and Regulations (see Chap. 2) states the RF power limitations of
an amateur radio station. Thus the amateur operator needs some capa-
bility to measure the RF power output to the antenna.
The inherent design of modern transmitters and transceivers pro-
vides an indication of the expected RF power output. Thus a 2-meter
FM, 3-watt Handie-talkie will provid a power out of approximately 3
watts. The same is true for a 100-watt HF transceiver. The power out-
put will usually never exceed 100 watts for any amateur band. How-
ever, the power output of some transceivers in the higher RF bands
may drop below the stated 100 watts.
Many of the modern RF power amplifiers in the 600- to 1000-watt
category use transmitting-type vacuum tubes. These tubes may be tri-
odes or screen-grid tetrodes. (Yes, these types of tubes are still being
manufactured.) The power output of these amplifiers is defined as the
sum of the plate power and the screen-grid power (for tetrodes) during
key-down conditions. The output power of solid state (transistor)
power amplifiers can be calculated in a similar manner if access to the
collector voltage and current can be determined.
Example. During the key-down operation, a tube-type RF power amplifier has the
following characteristics:
dc plate voltage  600 Vdc
dc plate current  300 mA dc
dc screen voltage  300 Vdc
dc screen current  10 mA dc
filament current  500 mA ac
Compute the power output of the RF power amplifier and deter-
mine if this power is within the legal limits for the HF bands autho-
rized for the Technician operator with 5 WPM certification. This
power limit is 200 watts pep. Note: All other amateur operators,
including Technician operators, must observe this power limitation
when operating on these band segments.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO TRANSMITTERS 293
If you have wondered how the output power of RF transistor power
amplifiers can be determined, the theoretical answer is relatively sim-
ple. Simply multiply the transistor’s collector current by the Vcc sup-
ply voltage—the answer will be in watts. However, you may
experience difficulties in measuring the collector current. Also, the
compact construction may invite accidental shorting of components
and cause costly transistors to be destroyed. Don’t attempt this proce-
dure unless you are an experienced technician.
Solution.
A review of the data given in this example shows that the filament power
is not considered when calculating RF power output. Accordingly, this
data will be ignored.
Step 1. Calculate the plate power:
Pp  Vp Ip (Eq. 8.2)
where
Pp is the plate input power in watts
Vp is the dc plate voltage in volts
Ip is the dc plate current in amperes
Thus,
Pp  600 V   0.3 A  180 watts
Step 2. Calculate the screen grid power:
Ps  Vs  Is
where
Ps is the screen power in watts
Vs is the screen grid voltage in volts
Is is the screen grid current in amperes
Thus,
Ps  300 V   0.010 A  3 watts
Step 3. Add the values obtained from Steps 1 and 2 to obtain total
output power for the RF power amplifier:
Ptotal  180 3  183 watts
294 CHAPTER EIGHT
Both dc voltmeters and ammeters (or a
multimeter set up for dc measurements)
can be used to monitor the voltages and
currents associated with the operation of
the final RF power amplifier stage of the
transmitter or transceiver. Many transmit-
ters and transceivers incorporate a dc or
RF ammeter for continual monitoring of
the final amplifier current during “tune-
up” and normal operation. Commercial RF
watt meters for “in-line” connection with
the antenna transmission line or with
dummy loads are available for hams who
regularly use high-power RF power ampli-
fiers. Also, when amateur operators want
to experiment with RF circuits and anten-
nas, they will want to continually monitor
power output levels. Figure 8.15 shows an
in-line RF wattmeter which provides true
peak power measurements of CW, AM,
FM, and SSB modes of operation. Many
antenna tuners (covered in Chap. 10)
incorporate power meters for monitoring
output RF power levels. Finally, designs
for “home-brew” construction of RF
power meters are available in amateur
publications.
The Bird Model 43 Directional “THRULINE”
Wattmeter. This versatile, highly accurate RF
wattmeter is extremely popular with amateurs for
measuring RF power levels. The Model 43 features a
50-ohm impedance; direct meter reading in watts;
low insertion VSWR of less than 1.05 to 1; and plug-
in elements for power levels from 100 milliwatts to
10,000 watts full scale and a frequency range of 0.45
to 2300 MHz. Bird Electronic Corporation, 303 Aurora
Road, Salon, OH 44139-2794, Telephone: (216) 248-
1200
F I G U R E 8 . 1 5
The antenna connected to the amateur radio receiver in your ham
shack may collect hundreds to thousands of radio signals at any one
time. The frequencies of these signals may range from the AM broad-
cast band and below, to the VHF and UHF FM and TV broadcast bands
and above. In between these extreme frequency limits are amateur,
government, commercial, maritime, and other communications ser-
vices. The amplitudes of these signals being fed into the antenna ter-
minals of the receiver vary from less than 1 microvolt to many
millivolts. Many amateur contacts are made with received signals on
the order of a few microvolts.
The purpose of the amateur receiver is twofold: select, amplify, and
demodulate the desired radio signal; and reject all other signals. The
old amateur expression “If you can’t hear ‘em, you can’t work ‘em” is
most appropriate for this discussion.
Amateur receivers are available as separate pieces of equipment
or as part of a transceiver. Many excellent commercial receivers, new
or used, are available to help get you on the air as soon as possible.
Figure 9.1 shows a deluxe amateur HF and VHF, all-mode trans-
ceiver—a complete amateur station.
Introduction to Radio
Receivers
9
295
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
296 CHAPTER NINE
Sometimes you will find used receivers, in good operating condi-
tion, at local ham swap-fests or conventions. Replacement transistors,
vacuum tubes, and other parts can usually be obtained from local elec-
tronics stores, swap-fasts, and advertisements in amateur radio journals.
These old “boat anchors” can give you years of good service, either as
the primary receiver or as a back-up receiver in your ham station.
Amateur receivers in kit form are available from many commercial
suppliers. Figure 9.2 shows the HR-40, a 40-meter, single-band
CW/SSB receiver kit offered by Ramsey Electronics Inc., 793 Canning
Parkway, Victor, NY 14564 [telephone: (716) 924-4560]. Other receiver
kits are available for HF and VHF amateur bands. A receiver kit , along
with a transmitter kit, is an exciting as well as inexpensive way to get
on the air as soon as possible.
F I G U R E 9 . 1
The Icom IC-746 all-mode hf/vhf transceiver. This modern amateur radio transceiver provides a
remarkable coverage of the following amateur and related radio frequencies. Receive coverage:
30 kHz–60 MHz and 108 MHz–174 MHx; transmit coverage: all amateur bands from 160
meters to 2 meters. The transmit function provides 100 watts pep on all hf bands and the vhf
bands of 6 meters and 2 meters. All-mode operation covers CW, AM, USB, LSB, and FM. Other
valuable operator features include digital signal processing (DSP) for selecting desired signals
while rejecting unwanted signals; a “band scope” that provides a large multifunction LCD
display displaying band conditions around a displayed frequency, received signal amplitude
display, and transmission modes; and a built-in hf automatic antenna tuner. The transciever
operates on 13.8 vdc, 20 amperes, maximum power source (battery or external ac power
supply) and can be operated as a mobile or fixed station radio.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 297
Definitions
The following definitions of terms related
to receivers are important to both the begin-
ner and the licensed amateur radio opera-
tor. The Technician exam will include
questions on the theory and operation of
amateur radio receivers.
Beat frequency oscillator (BFO) The
BFO stage in a receiver generates a high-fre-
quency signal that is mixed or heterodyned
with the incoming modulated carrier, such
as a CW signal. This mixing action pro-
duces an audio beat frequency signal that
can be used to drive a loudspeaker.
Demodulator (or detector) The
demodulator or detector stage in a
receiver separates the audio signals
from an incoming modulated carrier
signal. The key component in a demod-
ulator or detector circuit is usually a
silicon diode, a nonlinear device.
Older tube radios use a vacuum-tube
diode.
Frequency-selective networks Fre-
quency-selective networks are used in receivers to pass or reject
RF, IF, or audio signals. These networks may consist of parallel or
series LC circuits, quartz crystal filters, mechanical filters, or a
combination of these devices.
Intermediate-frequency (IF) amplifiers The IF amplifier in super-
heterodyne receivers is a fixed-frequency, high-gain amplifier that
exhibits sharp selectivity. The IF amplifier is usually connected between
the mixer and demodulator stages of the receiver. Some receivers employ
two or more stages of IF amplification.
Local oscillator The local oscillator is used in superheterodyne
receivers to generate a high-frequency signal. This signal is mixed
with the incoming modulated carrier signal, producing the IF signal.
Local oscillators may be tunable or fixed-frequency, depending on
how they are used in the receiver.
F I G U R E 9 . 2
Ramsey Model HR-40 40-Meter (7 MHz) All Mode
Receiver. The HR-40 is a single band,direct conversion
receiver for receiving SSB, CW, RTTY, and AM signals on
the popular 40-meter band. Available in kit form, this
receiver features the Signetics NE-602 Oscillator-Mixer IC
for outstanding sensitivity and efficient operation;
smooth varactor diode electronic tuning over any 250 kHz
segment of the 40-meter band; front panel RF gain,
tuning, volume, and on-off controls; an LM386 audio
amplifier IC for providing crisp clean audio to external
headphones or speaker; and an internal transistor 9-volt
battery. Ramsey Electronics, Inc.
298 CHAPTER NINE
Product detector The product detector is incorporated in some CW
and SSB receivers to demodulate the incoming modulated carrier signal.
Receiver In communications terms the receiver is a device for
receiving selected radio signals from an antenna and processing these
signals for the required output form.
Receiver overload This condition occurs when the antenna col-
lects a strong signal and desensitizes the receiver and the desired sig-
nal is distorted or no longer heard. Receiver overload can occur
regardless of the frequency the receiver is tuned to. Front-end overload
is another name given to receiver overload.
Radio-frequency (RF) amplifier The RF amplifier used in most
receivers amplifies the incoming RF signal from the antenna. The RF
amplifier provides for some selectivity and limited gain characteristics.
Superheterodyne receiver The superheterodyne receiver com-
bines the incoming RF signal with the output from a local oscillator to
produce an intermediate-frequency signal. The IF signal is amplified ,
demodulated, and converted to an appropriate output signal, such as
the audio signal required by headphones or speakers.
Tuned radio-frequency (TRF) receiver An early form of radio
receiver, the TRF receiver employs one or more stages of RF amplifi-
cation followed by a demodulator and audio amplifier. Usually, the
TRF receiver does not provide the gain and selectivity offered by the
superheterodyne receiver.
Receiver Basics
Amateur radio receivers must be able to pick up extremely weak sig-
nals, separate these signals from noise and the many strong signals
always present on the air, have adequate frequency stability to hold to
the desired signals, and demodulate the radio signals for reproduction.
In general, receiver performance can be rated in terms of sensitiv-
ity, selectivity, and frequency stability. Additional factors related to
the operational capability of the receiver include frequency coverage,
demodulation or detector modes (CW, AM, SSB, or FM), frequency
readout, and power requirements.
Although receivers vary in complexity and performance, they all
have four basic functions: reception, selection, demodulation, and
reproduction. These functions are illustrated in the simple receiver
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 299
shown in Fig. 9.4. Some of these functions employ amplifiers to boost
the signals to usable levels.
Reception
Reception is the ability of the receiver to process weak signals being
collected by the antenna. This is related primarily to the sensitivity of
the receiver. Most receivers contain several amplifier stages to produce
the large amounts of gain required to boost the signals from levels of
microvolts to volts. Thus, the total gain of a receiver may be on the
order of a million to one.
Factors influencing receiver sensitivity include electrical noise
generated in the antenna circuits and within the receiver, particularly
in the front-end or RF stages. Electrical noise is produced by thermal
agitation of molecules in a conductor and within amplifying devices
such as transistors and tubes. In general, electrical noise is indepen-
dent of frequency and increases with temperature and bandwidth.
Any noise present at the antenna terminals of a receiver is ampli-
fied along with the signal being received. Thus, there is a limit to the
sensitivity that a receiver can possess. Most modern receivers have a
sensitivity of 1 microvolt or less. Many receiver specifications define
A simple “tuned radio frequency” (TRF) receiver that incorporates the four basic functions of reception,
selection, demodulation, and reproduction.
Reception Selection Demodulation Reproduction
Desired signal
Antenna
L1
C1
L2 R1 R2 C2 C4
C3 L3
Q1
FET
L4
C5
R3
Head
phones
V
Q2
npn
Amplified audio signal
Detected
audio
signal from
carrier
CR1
DiodeAmplified signal
F I G U R E 9 . 3
300 CHAPTER NINE
the sensitivity in terms of microvolts for a 10-dB (S + N)/N (signal plus
noise/noise). For example, a sensitivity of 0.5 microvolt for a 10-dB (S
+ N)/N simply means that the amplitude of the noise generated in the
receiver is about 10 dB below a signal level of 0.5 microvolt. Stated in
an alternate manner, the “noise floor” of the receiver is about 0.16
microvolts. Any signal below this level will be masked by the noise
and will not be heard in the speaker.
For HF frequencies below about 20 to 30 MHz, external noise
(atmospheric and man-made) is usually well above internal receiver
noise. Most HF receivers have an adequate sensitivity to handle sig-
nals in this frequency range.
Selection or selectivity
Selection or selectivity is the ability of the receiver to tune to a desired
signal and reject unwanted signals with frequencies other than that of
the desired signal. A receiver employs high-Q LC tank circuits or spe-
cial crystal filters to pass only a narrow band of frequencies. Thus, the
passband or bandwidth of the receiver is all-important in rejecting
unwanted signals. Figure 9.4 illustrates the bandwidths of two
receivers. Both receivers are tuned to the same signal at 7165 kHz.
Selectivity curves for two HF receivers.
Undesired signal
Receiver B selectivity
Receiver A selectivity Desired signal
3 dB bandwidth for receiver A
3 dB bandwidth for receiver B
Undesired signal
7162 kHz 7165 kHz 7168 kHz
F I G U R E 9 . 4
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 301
Unwanted CW signals are also present at 7162 and 7168 kHz. The
sharp selectivity of receiver A effectively rejects the two unwanted sig-
nals. Receiver B has a broad selectivity that passes all three signals,
causing interference to the operator.
The selectivity of many modem CW receivers is on the order of sev-
eral hundred hertz. This is adequate for rejecting most signals close to
the frequency of operation. All SSB and AM receivers should have a
selectivity of about 2500 Hz for amateur voice operation. Many
CW/SSB receivers and transceivers employ switchable filters to per-
mit optimum reception of either type of signal.
Demodulation or detection
Demodulation or detection is the process of separating the low-
frequency intelligence (usually an audio signal) from the incoming
modulated carrier signal. Solid-state devices or vacuum tubes are
used in receiver detector circuits.
The two more common types of detectors used in HF receivers are
the diode detector for CW and AM and the product detector for CW or
SSB signals. Figure 9.3 illustrates the diode detector. A product detec-
tor is shown in Fig. 9. 5. The n-channel FET serves as a mixer where
IF
amplifier
C2
C1
R1
R2
R3
Q1
2N4416
C3
Beat
frequency
oscillator
RFC1
Low pass audio
filter
RFC2
C4 C5
V
C6 Audio
amplifier Speaker
A product detector using an n-channel JFET transistor.
F I G U R E 9 . 5
302 CHAPTER NINE
the IF signals are mixed with the audio-frequency signal from the BFO.
The low-pass audio filter consisting of C4RFC2C5 prevents the IF or
BFO signals from entering the audio amplifier. The product detector is
useful for demodulating either CW or SSB signals.
Reproduction
The final process in receiving a radio signal is to convert the detected
signal to an audio signal to drive a speaker or headphones. Usually a
high-gain audio amplifier is used to amplify the weak signals from the
detector stage. The output of the audio amplifier is then fed to either a
speaker or headphones for reproduction.
Most HF receivers have an internal speaker and an output jack for
headphone operation. The simple single-stage audio amplifier shown
in Fig. 9.3 is suitable for headphone operation. A two- or three-stage
audio amplifier is usually required for driving a speaker.
Simple Receivers
The first radio receivers were simple devices consisting of nothing
more than a tuned circuit, crystal detector, and headphones. Figure
9.6 shows a typical crystal set that is capable of receiving local AM
broadcast stations. Parts for this simple receiver can be obtained from
most local electronic parts houses or from discarded AM tube-type or
transistor radios. Kits such as the Radio Shack Crystal AM Radio Kit,
Catalog No. 28-177, are also available for constructing a crystal set.
The crystal set cannot properly demodulate CW or SSB signals.
Also, the sensitivity and selectivity of this type of circuit is not ade-
quate for amateur operation. Additional sensitivity can be obtained by
adding an audio amplifier to the output of the crystal set.
Tuned radio-frequency (TRF) receivers
Receiver sensitivity and selectivity can be improved by the addition
of one or more stages of radio-frequency amplification. This type of
receiver is called the TRF receiver. Figure 9.3 is basically a TRF
receiver design. Many commercial AM receivers built in the 1920s
and 1930s used the TRF approach. Some of these receivers employed
two to four stages of RF amplification to obtain the required sensitiv-
ity and selectivity.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 303
Direct-conversion receivers
The direct-conversion receiver, shown in Fig. 9.7, is a simple and pop-
ular approach for receiving CW and SSB signals. The received signal is
applied to the detector stage along with an RF signal generated by the
HF oscillator. The frequency of the HF oscillator signal is slightly
higher (or lower) than the frequency of the incoming signal to produce
an audio beat frequency. For example, if the incoming signal fre-
quency is 7155.0 kHz and the HF oscillator is tuned to 7155.4 kHz, a
400-Hz audio signal is produced by the mixing action in the detector.
This 400-Hz signal is applied to the high-gain audio amplifier through
a very narrow bandwidth audio filter.
Selectivity in this type of receiver is accomplished by LC tuned net-
works ahead of the detector stage and the audio filter between the
detector and audio amplifier.
Many amateur designs for the direct conversion receiver have been
developed over the past few years. Many of these designs employ the
Signetics NE602 Oscillator-Mixer IC and the LM386 Audio Amplifier
IC. The popular Ramsey HR Series Receiver Kits for 20, 30, 40, and 80
meters employ these two ICs in a direct conversion circuit.
Short wire antenna for
local reception (25–50 ft.)
Alternate long wire antenna
for distant reception (50–100 ft.)
Electrical ground
connect to
water pipe
or ground rod
Headphones
2000 to 5000 ohms
impedanceL1
L2 C2
0.001 F
C1
365pF
D1 1N914
A simple crystal receiver for the beginner.
F I G U R E 9 . 6
304 CHAPTER NINE
Figure 9.8 shows the circuit for the HR-40 Direct Conversion Receiver
for 40 meters. Here’s how this circuit works. The incoming signal from
the antenna is coupled through C5 and the RF gain control R1, to antenna
input transformer L1. (A 10.2-MHz IF transformer, detuned to cover the
40-meter band, can be substituted.) This “tuned” transformer peaks the
desired signal and applies it to the NE602’s mixer section. The shielded
oscillator coil, L2, along with varactor diode D1, R2, R5, C1, C2, C3, and
C4, form an oscillator network with the NE602’s internal oscillator.
Rotating R2 varies the oscillator’s frequency over a tuning range of about
250 kHz. The NE602 mixes the incoming RF signal with the signal from
the internal oscillator to produce an audio signal at Pin 4.
The output audio signal is coupled to the LM 386 audio amplifier
via coupling capacitor C8 and volume control R3. Capacitor C9 boosts
the voltage gain of the LM386 to about 50. The high-level audio output
is coupled from Pin 5, U2, to external headphones or a low impedance
(4 to 8 ohms) speaker through coupling capacitor C12 and output con-
nector J2.NE602.
An internal 9-volt transistor battery (or an external power source of
about 9–12 Vdc, 60 mA) is used to power the HR-40. Note that zener
diode D2, along with C10 and R4, form a 6.2-Vdc voltage regulator net-
work to improve stability of the NE602’s internal oscillator circuit.
Block diagram for a 40-meter direct conversion receiver.
Antenna
7155.0 kHz desired signal
LC tuned
network
(7.0–7.3 MHz)
Mixer
Low pass
audio
filter
Audio
amplifier
HF
oscillator
(7.0–7.3 MHz)
400-Hz audio signal
HF oscillator set to 7155.4 kHz
F I G U R E 9 . 7
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 305
The Superheterodyne Receiver
The superheterodyne receiver, developed in the early 1930s, elimi-
nated most of the problems experienced with earlier types of receivers.
Today, the superheterodyne receiver is used in virtually all types of
radio communications services, including amateur, commercial two-
way radio, and AM, FM, and TV broadcast receivers.
The primary difference between the TRF and superheterodyne
receivers is the conversion of the incoming RF signal to an intermedi-
ate-frequency (IF) signal by the superheterodyne receiver. Figure 9.9
Schematic diagram for the Ramsey HR-40 CW/SSB Direct Conversion Receiver. Ramsey Electronics Inc.
Speaker
J2
386
220F
U2
7
5
8
6
1
3
2
4
C12
C9
10F
9V
9V

10K
R6
R3
10K
CW
Volume
B1
9V
S1
Power
220F
C11
10F
C7
.01
100
C1
C2
100
.001
C3
.R4
270
6.2V
D2C10
220F
U1
NE602 7
5
8
6
1
3
2
4
C8
XFMR, IF
L1RF gain
R1
10K
Antenna
J1 C5
.01
CW
CW
9V
Tuning
R5
10K
R2
10K
C4
100
D1
1N4002 L2
IND.VAR
Ramsey HR-40 schematic diagram
A B C D
A B C D
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
R1, R2, R3 may be 2K, 5K, or 10K
C8 and C9 may be 2.2 to 22 uF
Ramsey Electronics Inc.
Direct conversion receiverTitle
Size
Date 10/03/91
Filename HR40.S01
Drawn by TRH
Sheet 1 of
Number Rev
A HR-40 1.0
F I G U R E 9 . 8
306 CHAPTER NINE
shows a block diagram for a CW superheterodyne receiver. The addi-
tion of the IF amplifier stage provides for controlled high gain and nar-
row bandwidth selectivity at the IF signal frequency.
To understand the operation of the superheterodyne receiver, each
stage is discussed in detail. The superheterodyne receiver shown in
Fig. 9.9 indicates operation in the 80-meter band. However, any ama-
teur band could have been selected for this example. Band switching
circuits in the RF and local-oscillator stages provide for operation on
80 through 10 meters in most amateur HF receivers and transceivers.
Sometimes the tuning capacitors in the RF and local-oscillator stages
are ganged for single-knob tuning to the desired frequency of opera-
tion. For example, the RF stage in Fig. 9.9 can be tuned from 3500
to 4000 kHz while the local-oscillator frequency ranges from 3955 to
4455 kHz. At any frequency within the 80-meter band, the local-oscil-
lator frequency is 455 kHz above that of the incoming RF signal.
When switch S1 in Fig. 9.9 is set to the CW/SSB position, either
CW or SSB signals can be received. In the AM position, the beat-fre-
quency oscillator is disabled and the receiver will receive conven-
tional AM signals. An automatic gain control (AGC) amplifier is
Block diagram for an 80-meter superheterodyne receiver.
Antenna
3735 kHz-Desired signal
(4645 kHz-Image frequency signal)
3735 kHz 455 kHz 455 kHz
RF
amplifier
3500–400
kHz
Mixer
4190 kHz
AGC bus
IF
amplifier
(455 kHz)
Detector
Local
oscillator
3955–4455
kHz
Beat
frequency
oscillator
450–460 kHz
AGC
ampl.
S meter
CW
SSB
S1
400 Hz
AM 455.4 kHz
Audio
amplifier Speaker
F I G U R E 9 . 9
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 307
included to compensate for variations in the incoming signal level.
The output of the AGC amplifier is a dc voltage that controls the gain
of the IF and RF amplifier stages. The S meter is also connected to the
AGC amplifier stage to show relative levels of incoming signals.
RF amplifiers
The RF amplifier contains LC tuned circuits that provide for some
selectivity and limited gain at the desired signal frequency. The RF
amplifier also provides two additional advantages in the superhetero-
dyne receiver. First, it isolates the mixer and local-oscillator stages
from the antenna circuits, preventing radiation of the local-oscillator
signal from the antenna.
The second advantage of the RF amplifier is that it attenuates
unwanted image signals appearing at the antenna terminals. The
image signal frequency differs from the desired signal frequency by
twice the IF frequency. In Fig. 9.9, the desired signal frequency is 3735
kHz and the image frequency is 4645 kHz (or 3735 kHz plus
2 × 455 kHz). If allowed to reach the mixer stage, the 4645-kHz image
signal would mix with the 4190-kHz local-oscillator signal and pro-
duce another 455-kHz signal into the IF amplifier. The ratio of the
desired signal level to that of the image frequency signal level is called
the image rejection ratio.
Local oscillators
The local oscillator generates a constant-amplitude sine-wave signal
whose frequency differs from the frequency of the incoming carrier
signal by an amount equal to the IF frequency. The local-oscillator fre-
quency can be positioned either above or below the incoming carrier
frequency. This selection is determined by the frequency coverage of
the receiver and any requirements for ganged tuning of the RF and
local-oscillator stages. Most local oscillators in AM broadcast receivers
and the lower bands in amateur HF receivers generate a frequency
above that of the incoming carrier frequency.
The tunable local oscillators in superheterodyne receivers must
possess adequate frequency stability for the intended operation. For
example, if the local-oscillator frequency drifts more than several
hundred hertz, this would shift the incoming signal out of the pass-
band of the receiver. For single-sideband operation, a shift of 50 to
308 CHAPTER NINE
100 Hz in the local-oscillator frequency can result in unintelligible
speech at the output.
Frequency stability in the lower amateur HF bands (80 and 40
meters) can usually be achieved by the use of rigid mechanical con-
struction techniques, temperature-compensating components, and a
regulated power supply. However, it is difficult to design LC oscilla-
tors for stable operation at frequencies above these bands. Receivers
that employ tunable local oscillators in the higher HF bands represent
a compromise between operational performance and cost.
One approach to achieving frequency stability in the higher HF
bands is the use of crystal-controlled down converters or frequency
translators. Figure 9-10 illustrates a typical 15-meter converter that
translates the 15-meter band down to 3.5 to 3.95 MHz. In this manner,
the 80-meter superheterodyne receiver acts as a variable-IF receiver.
Receivers that use this approach are called double-conversion super-
heterodyne receivers. Most of these types of receivers contain crystal-
controlled converters for the amateur HF bands above 40 meters. On
80 and 40 meters, the receiver employs a single-conversion approach.
An additional advantage of the double-conversion receiver is
improved image rejection.
Block diagram for a down-converter that converts the 15-meter band to the 40-meter
band.
Antenna
RF
amplifier
(21.0-21.45
MHz)
15-meter converter
Mixer
Crystal
controlled
oscillator
(17.5 MHz)
80-meter
superheterodyne
receiver
3.5–3.95 MHz
“IF signal”
F I G U R E 9 . 1 0
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 309
Mixers
The purpose of the mixer stage is to convert the frequency of the
incoming carrier signal to that of the IF amplifier. The action of the
mixer is illustrated in Fig. 8.11 in Chapter 8. The mixer produces four
major output signals when driven by two input signals of different fre-
quencies, f1 and f2:
f1  an original input signal frequency,
f2  an original input signal frequency,
f1 f2  sum of the two input frequencies,
f1 – f2 = the difference of the two input frequencies.
Only one of the four mixer output frequencies is used in the super-
heterodyne receiver, either f1 f2 or f1  f2. The remaining three mixer
output signals can cause interference within the receiver if proper
design steps are not taken.
Tubes, diodes, transistors, or special integrated-circuit chips are used
as the active elements in mixer circuits. A typical MOSFET transistor
mixer circuit is shown in Fig. 9.11. Note that transformer T1 is tuned
A dual-gate MOSFET transistor mixer circuit used in many HF receivers.
Antenna
RF
amplifier
T1
C1
C2
Q1
Dual gate MOSFET
R1
R2
C3
C4 C5
T2
Local
oscillator
IF
amplifier
V
F I G U R E 9 . 1 1
310 CHAPTER NINE
to the frequency of the incoming signal while transformer T2 is tuned
to the IF frequency.
Regenerative-detector receivers
The regenerative-detector receiver, shown in Fig. 9.12 in a vacuum
tube circuit, is a simple but highly sensitive receiver. Easy to con-
struct, this circuit has been popular with amateurs since the 1920s and
1930s. Some versions of this receiver employed an RF amplifier stage
to improve selectivity and an audio amplifier to boost the audio output
for speaker operation. Plug-in coils were used for band switching.
The regenerative-detector circuit employs regenerative feedback
from the plate to the grid elements by inductive coupling from L3 to
L2. The amount of feedback is controlled by C3. For CW and SSB oper-
ation, the detector circuit is made to oscillate at a frequency slightly
different from that of the incoming signal.
The regenerative-detector receiver has been largely replaced by the
more selective and stable superheterodyne receiver for most amateur
operation. However, the simplicity and low cost of the “gennie” regen-
erative-detector circuit is very attractive to the experimenter and new-
comer to amateur radio.
IF amplifiers
The characteristics of the IF amplifier in a superheterodyne receiver
are best described in terms of high gain and narrow selectivity. Gener-
ally speaking, the gain and selectivity of a receiver are determined by
the IF amplifier.
One form of regenerative-detector receiver.
Antenna L1
L3
L2
C2
C1
Tuning
control
R1
V1
C3
Regenerat-
ion control
RFC1
Headphones
V
Feedback
coil
F I G U R E 9 . 1 2
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 311
The selectivity of the IF amplifier must be equal to the bandwidth
of the incoming modulated RF signal. If a greater selectivity is pre-
sent, any adjacent-frequency signal will be passed through the IF
amplifier and cause interference to the operator. On the other hand,
if the selectivity is too narrow, some of the sidebands contained in
the modulated RF signal will be cut. This results in a loss of fidelity
when the audio portion of the signal is reproduced by the speaker or
headphones.
The optimum selectivity for SSB reception is about 2300 to 2500
Hz. Although some of the higher sidebands associated with speech sig-
nals extend beyond 2500 Hz, the loss of these sidebands does not
materially affect the sounds or information being conveyed by the
transmitting operator.
A selectivity of about 400 to 500 Hz is adequate for CW operation.
This narrow selectivity helps to reject any adjacent-frequency CW sig-
nal that could interfere with reception of the desired signal.
The more elaborate amateur HF receivers employ two or more
stages of IF amplification preceded by a highly selective crystal or
mechanical filter. With this arrangement, LC tuned circuits or IF trans-
formers are used for interstage coupling.
The selection of the IF frequency is determined by several factors
that include: gain, selectivity, and image signal rejection. For the
lower HF amateur bands (80 and 40 meters), 455 kHz is the IF fre-
quency used in many receivers. The IF amplifiers operating at this
frequency can provide excellent gain and selectivity. Mechanical fil-
ters are available for 455-kHz operation with selectivities of about
400 to 2500 Hz.
Receivers with an IF frequency of 455 kHz generally do not have
good image frequency rejection in the higher amateur HF bands (20
meters and above). For operation above 40 meters, IF frequencies
between 1.5 and 10 MHz are used to provide for the required image
frequency rejection. Crystal filters are employed in the better amateur
HF receivers and transceivers to obtain the required selectivity. One
popular IF frequency used in many amateur HF receivers and trans-
ceivers is 9 MHz. Four- and eight-pole crystal filters are available from
commercial sources that have selectivities of 2500 Hz for SSB and 500
Hz for CW modes of operation. The number of poles associated with a
crystal filter is related to the number of individual crystal elements
used to obtain the desired selectivity characteristics.
312 CHAPTER NINE
Detectors and beat-frequency oscillators
Detection or demodulation is defined as the process of separating the
audio-frequency components from the modulated carrier signal.
Detectors in superheterodyne receivers are often called second detec-
tors—the mixer stage can be considered as being the first detector.
For conventional AM signals, a diode detector is adequate for
removing the audio signals from the modulated IF carrier signal. This
process was described earlier in this chapter.
The reception of CW and SSB signals requires the mixing of the mod-
ulated IF signal with a signal from the beat-frequency oscillator (BFO).
The BFO is used to reinsert a carrier into the IF signal for demodulation
purposes. For CW reception, the BFO frequency is adjusted slightly
higher or lower than that of the IF frequency to produce an audio beat-
frequency signal. For example, if the IF frequency is 455 kHz, the BFO
frequency is adjusted to 456 or 454 kHz in order to produce a 1000-Hz
beat frequency. This audio signal is then applied to the audio amplifier
stage to produce an output in the speaker or headphones.
Automatic gain control
The purpose of an automatic-gain-control circuit is to maintain a con-
stant receiver-output level despite variations in the input signal
strength. The HF radio waves being propagated through the ionso-
phere are alternately attenuated and reinforced by an effect known as
fading. This causes the received signal strength at the antenna termi-
nals to vary over a wide range of values. Because the rectified signal
voltage at the detector stage is proportional to the amplitude of the
received signal, a portion of this voltage can be used to control the gain
of the receiver. For receivers employing vacuum tubes or npn transis-
tors in the stages preceding the detector, a negative voltage is fed back
to these devices for reducing the gain. Amplifiers and mixers employ-
ing pnp transistors require a positive voltage to control the amplifica-
tion of these stages.
Some receivers, particularly the better solid-state types, include an
AGC amplifier to obtain more control over the receiver gain charac-
teristics. These AGC circuits might have different time constants to
aid in receiving different types of signals, such as AM and SSB voice
and CW signals. The time constant of an AGC circuit describes the
length of time that gain control is maintained after the transmitted
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 313
signal is terminated. For example, without an appreciable time con-
stant in the AGC circuit, the normal pauses in SSB voice transmis-
sions would allow the receiver to immediately resume full gain
characteristics. This would produce an annoying burst of noise dur-
ing the intervals between voice signals.
S meters
The S or signal-strength meters are provided in some receivers and
transceivers to indicate relative strength of the incoming signal. Usu-
ally a portion of the rectified IF signal from the detector stage is
applied to a microammeter or milliammeter. If the receiver has an AGC
amplifier, this stage can be used to drive the S meter in addition to
controlling the gain of the receiver.
Most S meters are calibrated in terms of S units (S-1 to S-9) up to
about the midscale reading. Figure 9.13 shows a typical S-meter
scale. One S unit represents approximately a 6-decibel change in
received signal strength. A midscale reading, or S-9, is intended to
indicate a signal strength of about 50 microvolts. The upper half of
the S-meter scale is calibrated in decibels above S-9, usually up to 60
decibels. Thus, a signal strength reading of 60 decibels indicates that
the strength of the received signal is 60 dB above 50 microvolts, or
about 50 millivolts.
The S meter is seldom accurate because
many factors influence its operation. How-
ever, it is very useful in determining the
relative signal strength of incoming sig-
nals. The S meter is also useful in check-
ing or aligning the receiver. In many
transceivers, the S meter also serves to
indicate the status of transmitter functions
such as final RF amplifier current and RF
output power.
Interference and Receiver
Limitations
Any radio receiver can have difficulty in
receiving a desired signal due to three fac- Typical S-meter scale.
S units Decibels (dB)
01
3
5 7 9 20
40
60
F I G U R E 9 . 1 3
314 CHAPTER NINE
tors: external noise, internal noise, and interfering signals. As stated
earlier in this chapter, external noise in the HF frequencies, particu-
larly below about 20 MHz, is much higher than the internal noise gen-
erated by HF receivers. Only above approximately 20 MHz does
internal receiver noise become a problem in receiving extremely weak
signals.
The majority of the internal receiver noise is generated in the first
stage, either an RF amplifier or mixer stage. Much research has been
expended in developing low-noise circuits and components to reduce
internal receiver noise to a minimum level.
External noise can cause problems in receiving weak signals in two
ways. First, the noise collected by the antenna can simply mask the
incoming desired signal. If the desired signal is near or below the
incoming noise level, reception is virtually impossible. Some experi-
enced CW operators can copy CW signals through excessive noise lev-
els. However, voice and other amateur signals are unintelligible under
these conditions.
Receiver Overload
Assuming the desired signal is weak but well above external and receiver
noise levels, we might still have difficulty in receiving the desired signal.
Strong RF signals of widely different frequencies can be collected by the
antenna and cause receiver desensitization or front-end overload. For
example, strong signals at the image frequency, can cause direct interfer-
ence with the desired signal as well as reducing the receiver gain by
developing a high AGC (automatic gain control) voltage.
Other strong signals, at frequencies completely different from the
desired receiving and image frequencies, can produce overloading
effects in the first stage. This front-end loading effect reduces receiver
gain and the desired signal can be distorted or lost. Some receivers
have attenuation networks that can be switched into the input to the
first stage. This reduces the overloading effect on the first stage and
often permits normal amplification of the desired signal. To check for
this type of interference, tune the receiver to different frequencies. If
the receiver still exhibits poor gain and distorted audio output signals,
this is an indication that a strong signal is causing front-end overload-
ing of the receiver.
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 315
Harmonic Signals
Strong undesired signals collected by the antenna might possess a
harmonic frequency equal or close to the desired signal frequency. For
example, a receiver is tuned to 20 MHz and can experience interfer-
ence from a strong 5 MHz signal. Note that 20 MHz represents the 4th
harmonic of 5 MHz. In order to eliminate interference of this type, fil-
ters can be installed at the receiver antenna terminals to reduce these
strong signals to insignificant levels.
Constructing the “Sudden”
160- to 20-Meter Direct Conversion Receiver
The receiver kits described earlier in this chapter make excellent HF
receivers for the beginning amateur operator. However, some ama-
teurs prefer to build a receiver from scratch. The “Sudden” Receiver
described in this construction project was originally developed and
constructed by the Rev. George Dobbs [G3RJV, St. Aidan’s Vicarage,
498 Manchester Rd., Rochdale, Lancs, OL11 3HE, Great Britain.] Rev.
Dobbs’ versatile design of this receiver permits it to be configured for
any amateur band between 160 to 20 meters (160, 80, 40, 30, and 20
meters). He documented the construction of the Sudden Receiver in
the October 1991 issue of 73 Amateur Radio Today. You can assem-
ble this proven receiver in an evening or two of enjoyable effort.
Figure 9.14 shows a schematic diagram for the Sudden Direct
Conversion Receiver. The receiver is a simple design based on two
integrated circuits (ICs) and three inductors. A potentiometer, R1,
acts as an RF control to prevent signal input overload, particularly
on the lower HF bands. The T1/C1/C2/C3/T2 tuned network forms a
bandpass filter for the particular amateur band involved. The NE602
Oscillator-Mixer IC provides the RF mixer and local oscillator func-
tions for direct conversion of the SSB or CW signals to an audio sig-
nal. The local oscillator section of the NE602 is connected to a tuned
Colpitts oscillator circuit tuned by T3, C10, and the Variable Capac-
itor VC1. Note that the receiver tuning range is determined by VC1.
Table 9.1 provides a list of the frequency determining components
that permits you to configure the Sudden Receiver for a particular
amateur band.
316 CHAPTER NINE
Table 9.1 Frequency Determining Components for the Sudden Receiver
Band C1 C2 C3 T1 T2
160 220 pF 10 pF 220 pF BKXN-K3333R BKXN-K3333R
80 47 pF 3 pF 47 pF BKXN-K3333R BKXN-K3333R
40 100 pF 8.2 pF 100 pF BKXN-K3334R BKXN-K3334R
30 47 pF 3 pF 47 pF BKXN-K3334R BKXN-K3334R
20 100 pF 3 pF 100 pF BKXN-K3335R BKXN-K3335R
Band VC1 + C10 C4 C5 C6 T3
160 All Sections + 100 pF 0.001 mF 0.001 mF 560 pF BKXN-K3333R
80 All Sections + 100 pF 0.001 mF 0.001 mF 560 pF BKXN-K3333R
40 1 Section + 47 pF 560 pF 560 pF 270 pF BKXN-K4173AO
30 1 Section + 68 pF 680 pF 680 pF 220 pF BKXN-K3335R
20 1 Section + 68 pF 220 pF 220 pF 68 pF BKXN-K3335R
Source: Rev. George Dobbs, G3RJV, and 73 Amateur Radio Today, October 1991
Schematic diagram for the “Sudden Receiver.” This two-IC SSB/CW amateur receiver covering the 160- to 20-
meter bands was developed by the Rev. George Dobbs, G3RJV, Great Britain. Rev. George Dobbs, G3RJV, and 73
Amateur Radio Today, October 1991, WGE Center, Forest Road, Hancock, NH 03449, Telephone: (603) 525-4201
Antenna
(50~2.2k)
R1
1k
T1
C1*
C2*
C3*
T2
T3
C10*
VCI*
C8
0.01μF
C7
100pF
1
2
3 4
8
67
ICI
NE602
R3
1.8k C9
0.1μF
R2
27k
C5*
C4* C6*
C11
1μF
R4
4.7k
C12
0.1
C13
0.1μF
C14
10μF
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 8
IC2
LM386
R5
15
C17
0.1
C16
100μF
Phones
C15
100μF
R6
22
SWI 9V
(PP3)
F I G U R E 9 . 1 4
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 317
The detected audio output from the NE602 IC is applied to the
LM386 Audio Amplifier via Coupling Capacitor C11 and the Volume
Control R4. The LM386 Amplifier IC is configured for a voltage gain of
about 200 and provides adequate audio output via Coupling Capacitor
C16 for headphone reception. The LM386 Audio Amplifier provides
the necessary gain to amplify the detected audio to usable levels for
headphone listening.
Parts for the Sudden Receiver are listed in Table 9.2. Most of these
parts are readily available in local Radio Shack stores or electronic
supply houses. The Variable Tuning Capacitor VC1 can be difficult to
locate from local suppliers. You can order a variable tuning capacitor
from the source listed in the parts list or salvage a surplus variable
capacitor from an abandoned AM radio.
Table 9.2 Parts List for the Sudden receiver
Resistors
R1 1 k potentiometer
R2 27 k resistor
R3 1.8 k resistor
R4 4.7 k potentiometer
R5 15 ohm resistor
R6 22 ohm resistor
All resistors are 1⁄4 watt
Capacitors
C1–C6 See the Table
C7 100 pF capacitor
C8 0.01 mF capacitor
C9, C12, C13, C16, C17 0.1 mF capacitor
C10 See the Table
C11 1.0 mF/35 V tantalum capacitor
C14 10 mF/16 V tantalum capacitor
C15 100 mF/25 V electrolytic capacitor
(continued)
318 CHAPTER NINE
Table 9.2 Parts List for the Sudden receiver (Continued)
Coils, ICs and Misc.
T1, T2, T3 See the Table
IC1 NE602
IC2 LM386
SW1 SPST switch
VC1 Variable tuning capacitor (three sections: 10 pF, 10 pF, and 20 pF);
see the table and the note below.
A kit of all parts including the PC board, the TOKO coils and the tuning capacitor is available in the US
for $29.95 + $3 shipping from Kanga US, c/o Bill Kelsey N8ET, 3521 Spring Lake Dr., Findlay, OH 45840.
Tel. (419) 423-5643, 7–11 P.M. eastern. Kanga US will supply the blank PC board separately for $6 + $3
shipping. The complete kit is also available overseas from Kanga Products, 3 Limes Road, Folkestone,
Kent CT19 4AU, Great Britain.
Variable tuning capacitor VC1 is also available as part #2311007 from A.R.E. Surplus, 15272 S.R. 12E,
Findlay, OH 45840. Tel. (419) 422-1558.
The TOKO coils are also available from Penstock at (800) 736-7862.
Source: Rev. George Dobbs, G3RJV, and 73 Amateur Radio Today, October 1991
The Sudden Receiver can be constructed using a variety of construc-
tion techniques. Methods of construction for this receiver’s circuitry
include predrilled “prototyping” boards (Radio Shack P/N 276-170,
276-147, or 2726-158) or “perfboard” material (Radio Shack 276-1394).
Receiver checkout and alignment is straightforward with this type
of receiver. You should check the audio section for proper operation
before attempting test and alignment of the RF sections. With power
applied to the LM386 IC, you should hear a loud hum in the head-
phones when you touch the input terminal at PIN 3. The availability of
an audio oscillator or function generator will permit a more detailed
analysis of the operation of the LM386.
Alignment of the RF and local oscillator sections will require a
source of RF signals, either from an antenna or, better still, from an RF
signal generator. First, you must get the local oscillator tuned to the
desired HF amateur band. Connect a signal from an RF signal genera-
tor to C7 or an antenna to the antenna input connector. A QRP CW
transmitter makes an excellent alternate signal source for testing and
aligning the receiver. Adjust the core of T3 until the signal is heard in
the headphones. Now you can align the RF input bandpass filter by
peaking the adjustments of T1 and T2. The final adjustment involves
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 319
the proper band coverage as dictated by the local oscillator tuning
range. You can use a calibrating RF signal in the center of the band
(adjust the Tuning Capacitor VC1 to the center of its range) and then
adjust T3 for maximum reception. An alternate method is to use an RF
calibrating signal at the high end (or the low end) of the band, adjust
the tuning of the Tuning Capacitor VC1 to minimum (or maximum)
capacitance, and adjust T3 for maximum reception. Your “Sudden
Receiver” is now ready for operation. With a companion QRP CW
transmitter, you are ready to get on the air and make exciting contacts
with fellow hams.
FM Receivers
FM receiver design and construction is very similar to that of the
CW/AM/SSB receivers described in earlier sections. Today’s FM
receivers use the superheterodyne concept. Thus the RF, IF, and audio
amplifier and the local oscillator stages for each type of receiver are
virtually identical. To build an FM receiver, you need three additional
stages: a limiter IF stage, an FM detector or demodulator, and a deem-
phasis stage. By now, you have noticed that most of the newer amateur
radios have an “all-mode” capability. Thus CW, AM, SSB, and FM
modes of communications can be handled by one amateur radio.
Figure 9.15 shows a block diagram of an FM receiver. RF signals col-
lected by the antenna are applied to the RF amplifier stage. This stage
performs two important functions. First, the desired RF signal, some-
times only a few microvolts in amplitude, is amplified before being fed
to the mixer stage. The second function is that the RF amplifier rejects
or suppresses unwanted signals near the operating frequency.
The mixer stage heterodynes or mixes the incoming operating RF
frequency signal with the local oscillator signal. This action produces
the two original signals and the sum and difference frequencies. For
example, let the incoming RF FM signal frequency be 146.00 MHz and
the local oscillator signal frequency be tuned to 135.3 MHz. The mixer
out signals will have four combinations of the above frequencies:
146.0 MHz, 135.3 MHz, 281.3 MHz (from 146.0 135.3 MHz), and
10.7 MHz (from 146.0  135.3 MHz). The new 10.7-MHz signal is the
only one accepted by the tuned 10.7-MHz IF amplifier. Note that both
the sum and difference frequency signals possess the original FM
modulation characteristics. This process converts the FM signal to a
320 CHAPTER NINE
new FM signal frequency. Thus, tuning the FM receiver to any fre-
quency in the design coverage (for example, the 2-meter band of 144.0
to 148 MHz) always produces an IF signal of 10.7 MHz.
Now check the operating frequency of the IF amplifier. It is 10.7
MHz! Since the IF amplifier can operate at a single frequency (plus
and minus the FM modulation sidebands), it can be designed for very
high gain and sharp selectivity. 10.7 MHz is a standard IF frequency
used in most FM receivers. Some FM receivers will have one IF ampli-
fier stage while others will have two or more stages.
The limiter stage, tuned to the 10.7 MHz IF frequency, removes all
amplitude variations of the received signal as well as electrical noise.
This is accomplished by adjusting the limiter amplifier to operate in
the saturated mode. A parallel LC circuit, tuned to 10.7 MHz, restores
the distorted signal to a perfect sinewave with no amplitude varia-
tions. The limiter stage is responsible for producing sharp, clear voice
communications!
Unlike the AM detector, the FM detector detects variations in the
frequency of the incoming FM signal. There are many types of FM
Block diagram for a typical FM receiver using the superheterodyne concept. This design is
applicable for most FM receiver requirements: broadcast band (88–108 MHz), commercial
radiotelephone, and amateur operation on authorized FM emissions on the amateur bands.
RF
Amplifier
Local
Oscillator Deemphasis
Network
AF
Amplifier
Mixer IF
Amplifier Limiter FM
Detector
LO Signal
135.3 MHz
IF Signal
10.7 MHz
Unprocessed
Audio Signals
Processed
Audio
Signals
FM Signal
146.0 MHz
Antenna
AGC
AFC
Speaker
F I G U R E 9 . 1 5
INTRODUCTION TO RADIO RECEIVERS 321
detector, each being developed from the electronics state of the art—
from vacuum tubes to transistors and finally to integrated circuits.
Most modern FM communications receivers use a phase locked loop
(PPL), a veritable workhorse in current electronics technology. The
PLL is also used in local oscillator stages of superheterodyne receivers
to provide precise frequencies and in FM modulator stages.
A deemphasis network is required to restore the original frequency
response of the audio (or data) modulating signals. For improved high-
frequency response and reducing noise, the higher frequencies of the
audio modulating signal are boosted while the lower frequencies are
attenuated prior to transmission. A frequency-sensitive circuit is
needed in the receiver to restore the audio signal to its original condi-
tion. Thus a “copy” of the original audio signal is applied to the AF
amplifier. Virtually all amateur receivers (or the receive section of
transceivers) provide an audio jack for headphone use.
FM receivers usually include two important features to provide
clear and constant audio output signals. First, an automatic gain con-
trol (AGC) controls the gain of the RF and IF amplifiers to compensate
for varying signal levels from the antenna. The automatic frequency
control (AFC) control signal, generated by the FM detector stage, keeps
the local oscillator frequency at the proper frequency for optimum
reception.
Although not indicated by this general block diagram for FM
receivers, some communications receivers employ a second conver-
sion stage to down-convert the 10.7-MHz IF signal to a frequency of
455 kHz. Then the 455 kHz IF amplifiers provide for narrow frequency
response, which eliminates any remaining image frequency problems
and adjacent interfering signals.
This page intentionally left blank.
In the previous two chapters we covered transmitters and receivers
Now let us connect this equipment to a transmission line and
antenna. We will consider a systems approach because all of these
components must be properly matched for successful operation.
The transmission line is simply a device for conducting radio-fre-
quency energy between the amateur transmitter or receiver and the
antenna. The distances between these two locations will vary depend-
ing on where the amateur operator can install the transmitter and
receiver and the antenna. At HF frequencies, losses in the transmission
line will be negligible at distances between 50 to 100 feet (about 150 to
300 meters). However, if we increase distance or operating frequency,
losses in the transmission line might degrade system operation.
In the transmit mode, the transmission line must be capable of
delivering many watts of RF energy from the transmitter to the antenna
with negligible loss. In most cases, the same antenna and transmission
line is used for both transmitting and receiving. During the receiving
mode, the transmission line must be able to deliver low-level RF sig-
nals of a few micromicrowatts with minimum attenuation. A loss in
the transmission line can push these small signals into the noise level,
making reception impossible.
All about Transmission Lines
and Antennas
10
323
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
324 CHAPTER TEN
Definitions
Antenna An antenna is a conductor or group of conductors used
for radiating RF energy into space or collecting radiated RF energy
from space. In general, any antenna used for transmitting can also be
used for receiving purposes.
Antenna input resistance The ideal antenna acts as a resonant
circuit and presents a pure resistance to the transmission line. In
practice, antennas usually exhibit inductive or capacitive reactance,
resulting in a complex impedance. One definition of this input
impedance is that it is equal to the voltage across the antenna termi-
nals divided by the current flowing into the antenna. A related term
is radiation resistance. The ideal antenna accepts RF energy as if it
were a resistor connected across the end of the transmission line.
For example, a dipole antenna in free space has a radiation resis-
tance of 73 ohms. To the transmission line, this appears as a 73-ohm
resistor.
Antenna tuner Sometimes called a transmatch or antenna match-
ing unit, this device provides for matching the impedance of the trans-
mission line to that of the transmitter or antenna. For example, an
antenna tuner can be used to match a 50-ohm transmitter to a 300-ohm
transmission line.
Balun A balun is a device for matching or connecting balanced
and unbalanced circuits. For example, a balun can be used to match a
coaxial cable (an unbalanced transmission line) to a dipole antenna (a
balanced electrical device).
Characteristic impedance As applied to transmission lines, this
term defines the input impedance characteristics. Characteristic
impedance is a function of the lumped inductance and capacitance
contained in the transmission line and is approximately equal to L/C.
It appears as a resistive element when the transmission line is properly
matched to the transmitter and antenna. The popular RG-8/U coaxial
cable has a characteristic impedance of 52 ohms.
Coaxial-cable transmission lines This type of transmission line
employs an outer conductor that surrounds an inner conductor. An
insulating material such as polyethylene separates the two conduc-
tors. The outer conductor is normally held at ground potential while
the inner conductor is considered as the “hot” lead. A coaxial cable is
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 325
referred to as an unbalanced line. Typical coaxial cables used in ama-
teur radio stations have a characteristic impedance of 50 to 75 ohms.
Dipole antenna The dipole antenna consists of two “poles” or con-
ductors arranged in a straight line and separated at the center by an
insulator. The transmission line is connected to the center of the
dipole. A dipole antenna is normally one-half wavelength long from
end to end. Sometimes the dipole is called a center-fed Hertz antenna
or half-wave doublet antenna.
Electrical length The electrical length of an antenna is defined in
terms of wavelengths. A vertical antenna, for example, may have an
electrical length of one-quarter wavelength.
Harmonic operation Some antennas, such as the dipole, can be
used at an odd multiple of its operating frequency. For example, a 40-
meter dipole antenna will also perform as an antenna in the 15-meter
band. Note that 21 MHz is an odd (3rd) harmonic of 7 MHz. The use of
a 7-MHz doublet antenna at 21 MHz is called harmonic operation.
Multiband antenna A multiband antenna is one designed to oper-
ate on two or more bands of frequencies. For example, vertical anten-
nas designed for operation on 80, 40, 20, 15, and 10 meters can be
purchased from commercial sources or constructed from antenna
designs available in amateur handbooks.
Single-wire transmission lines Used primarily to connect a long-
wire antenna to a receiver, this is simply a single-conductor transmission
line. It is not used with transmitters because it tends to act as a radiator
and presents a varying impedance if allowed to swing with the wind.
Standing waves These are essentially stationary waves of voltage
and current that might exist on a transmission line or antenna. Stand-
ing waves are useful in antennas because they produce maximum radi-
ation of the RF signal. However, standing waves in a transmission line
are undesirable because they represent a mismatch of impedances.
This results in a portion of the RF energy delivered to the antenna
being reflected back to the transmitter.
Standing-wave ratio (SWR) This defines the ratio of the maximum
to minimum voltage or current levels in a transmission line. It is also
a function of the power delivered to the antenna and the power being
reflected back to the transmitter. An SWR bridge is a device for mea-
suring the SWR of a transmission line connected between a transmit-
ter and an antenna.
326 CHAPTER TEN
Vertical antenna In general, a vertical antenna consists of a vertically
positioned conductor, rod, or tower. A vertical quarter-wave antenna that
employs a ground plane is called a Marconi antenna. The ground plane
serves as a mirror, reflecting the radiated waves into space.
Transmission Line Basics
Let us consider the important role that the transmission line plays in the
amateur radio station. The function of the transmission line is to trans-
fer RF energy between the transmitting/receiving equipment and the
antenna. Figure 10.1 illustrates a typical Technician amateur installa-
tion employing an HF transceiver, a 50-ohm coaxial transmission line,
and a half-wave doublet antenna. Antennas designed for operation on
the 80- to 10-meter bands can be used in this basic configuration.
We have a properly matched RF system in Fig. 10.1. The transmit-
ter output impedance is adjusted to 50 ohms and matches into the 50-
ohm coaxial cable. At the antenna end, the 50-ohm cable matches the
50 ohms presented by the antenna. These conditions allow for maxi-
mum transfer of RF energy, both in transmit and receive modes of
operation. The half-wave doublet antenna shown in Fig. 10.1 is cut for
40-meter operation. However, antennas for any HF band can be substi-
tuted. Also, an arbitrary length of 100 feet was selected for the trans-
A typical Novice antenna installation for 40 meters.
100-watt
HF transceiver
#14 AWG stranded
antenna wire
50–75 Ohms
output impedance
Receive on the order of micromicrowatts
Transmit 100 watts
100 FT. (30M) RG-8/U Coaxial
transmission line
64 FT. (19.5M)
Half-wave doublet antenna
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 327
mission line. In practice, this length should be as short as possible to
reduce losses.
Types of Transmission Lines
Transmission lines come in a variety of types—single wire, parallel
two-wire open line, twin lead, twisted pair, and coaxial cable. This
discussion is limited to the more common types of transmission lines
used by most hams, twin-lead and coaxial lines. Figure 10.2 illustrates
these types of transmission lines. From top to bottom, Fig.
10.2 shows 300-ohm heavy-duty twin lead used for TV as well as ama-
teur radio, 72-ohm parallel transmission line, RG-58A/U 50-ohm coax-
ial cable with UHF-type connector, and RG-8/U 50-ohm foam-type
coaxial cable.
Twin-lead lines
Twin-lead line, available with a characteristic impedance of 72 to 300
ohms, was originally developed for television receivers. This line consists
of two parallel conductors embedded in a thin ribbon of plastic or poly-
ethylene material. Sometimes called ribbon-type TV cable, it generally
was not suitable for transmitting purposes. However, heavy-duty versions
with larger sizes of conductors are available for the amateur market.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2
Typical transmission lines used in amateur radio applications.
328 CHAPTER TEN
The twin-lead cable, a balanced form of transmission line, is used
with some special forms of antennas. However, twin-lead lines have
several limitations. Deposits of moisture and dirt on the line can change
the characteristic impedance, causing a mismatch and loss of efficiency.
The twin-lead line cannot be installed close to a metal surface, such as
being taped to the side of a tower. Again, this causes a change in the
characteristic impedance. The heavy-duty 72-ohm versions are less
affected by these limitations because the conductors are spaced closer
together to confine the electric field within the dielectric material.
Coaxial transmission lines
A coaxial line, or “coax” cable, is the most common type of trans-
mission line used in amateur radio operations from HF to UHF fre-
quencies. Coax, an unbalanced form of transmission line, consists of
an outer conductor surrounding an inner conductor. An insulating
material, usually polyethylene or polyfoam, is placed between the
conductors. The outer conductor, or braid, serves as a shield and is
normally held at ground potential. Figure 10.3 shows the construc-
tion used in a typical coaxial cable.
The major advantage of the coaxial line is that the RF field is con-
tained within the outer conductor. Also, the outer insulating jacket is
virtually waterproof, permitting outdoor installation. These factors
allow coax transmission lines to be installed almost anywhere—taped
to towers, placed in metal pipes, or even run underground.
Coax cables are available in many sizes and characteristic imped-
ances. Table 10.1 shows a group of the more common types of coaxial
cables used by hams. Attenuation factors have been converted to trans-
mission efficiencies to illustrate how cable length affects line losses. For
example, if the transmission line and antenna in Fig. 10.1 is operated on
40 meters, the transmission efficiency is
approximately 90 percent. This means that
90 percent of the 100 watts of power deliv-
ered to the transmission line, or 90 watts,
will be made available to the antenna for
radiation into space. Thus, 10 watts of RF
power will be dissipated in the transmis-
sion line. (This example assumes that the
antenna length is adjusted to the properBasic construction of coaxial cable.
Outer conductor
and shield braided
Inner conductor
Dielectric
Insulating jacket
F I G U R E 1 0 . 3
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 329
length and that the transmission line is matched to the antenna. For
example, an antenna too long or too short can cause additional loss of
power actually being radiated into space.) Reducing the line length to 50
feet (or 15 meters) will cut the power loss in the line to about 5 watts.
Both RG-8/U (52 ohms) and RG-11/U (75 ohms) are heavy-duty,
low-loss types of coaxial cable suitable for permanent, long-run instal-
lations. Figure 10.4 shows RG-8/U foam cable that is available in stan-
dard lengths up to 100 feet or more, with RF connectors installed. This
type of cable is highly resistant to all weather conditions and should
provide many years of service.
Lightweight, smaller coaxial cables, such as RG-58/U (52 ohms)
and RG-59/U (73 ohms), are more suitable for short cable runs (such as
mobile installations and portable operation) where the higher cable
losses are not important. Figure 10.4B shows RG-58/U, which is avail-
able in standard lengths with RF connectors installed.
An intermediate size cable, the RG-6, 75-ohm impedance, is ade-
quate for many installations where small size and weight is required.
Standing Waves
The transmission line is said to be matched to the antenna when each
impedance is resistive and equal in value. For example, a 50-ohm trans-
mission line connected to a 50-ohm antenna results in a maximum
transfer of RF power from the transmitter to the antenna. Thus properly
matched to the antenna, the transmission line exhibits a constant
impedance at any point along the line. This means that voltage and cur-
rent amplitudes are constant throughout the line. However, if the
antenna is not constructed or adjusted for the required frequency of
operation, the antenna will not match properly to the transmission.
Extreme cases of mismatch occur when the antenna appears to be either
a short or an open circuit. Figure 10.5 shows voltage and current rela-
tionships (standing waves along the transmission line) for these two
extreme conditions. Note that the transmission line is approximately
one wavelength long.
Standing-wave ratios
An antenna that is not matched to the transmission line will cause stand-
ing waves to appear on the line. The ratio of maximum to minimum
330 CHAPTER TEN
levels of voltage (or current) is called the standing-wave ratio (SWR).
This can also be defined as the ratio of the impedances involved, or:
SWR  or (whichever is larger) (Eq. 10.1)
where
SWR is the standing-wave ratio
ZL is the impedance of the load in ohms
ZO is the impedance of the transmission line in ohms
ZO
ZL
ZL
ZO
Coaxial cables available in standard lengths with RF connectors installed. (A) Heavy-
duty RG-8/U is suitable for long runs of transmission lines. (B) The smaller RG-58/U is
handy for short cable runs such as modible installations.
A
BF I G U R E 1 0 . 4
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 331
Example If a 50-ohm coaxial cable is connected to a 75-ohm antenna,
what is the resulting SWR?
Solution
SWR    1.5
It is customary for hams to express an SWR such as this as “1.5 to 1.”
75
50
Z L
ZO
Standing-wave characteristics of transmission lines.
50-Ohm transmission line
XMTR
XMTR
XMTR
No standing wave 50-Ohm load
1/2
1/2
Current
voltage
Shorted load
Voltage
current
Open (infinite load)
(A) Matched transmission line.
(B) Standing waves created by shorted load.
(C) Standing waves created by open line.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 5
332 CHAPTER TEN
THE MEANING OF SWR
Now that SWR has been defined, let’s see how it affects the perfor-
mance of our radiating system.
Table 10.1 shows us that any transmission line, even when
properly matched, has some attenuation or loss. This loss is due
mostly to resistance in the conductors and power dissipated in the
dielectric.
The ideal SWR of a transmission line is 1 to 1. Any increase in SWR
results in additional power loss. For example, a mismatched antenna
causes power to be reflected back toward the transmitter. For high values
of SWR and large transmission-line losses, power lost in the system can
be greater than power radiated by the antenna.
In general, an SWR of 2 to 1 or less results in minimal loss in the
radiating system. When receiving a transmitted signal, you can barely
notice the difference between an SWR of 2 to 1 and that of 1 to 1.
STANDING-WAVE MEASUREMENTS
Standing-wave ratios can be measured with devices called SWR
bridges or SWR meters. You can purchase an SWR meter from most
amateur supply houses or build one from plans in ham publications
such as the ARRL Radio Amateur’s Handbook. Figure 10.6 shows a
commercial SWR meter that also measures output power levels. Many
SWR meters cover a frequency range of about 3 to 150 MHz and work
with either 50- or 75-ohm transmission lines.
These devices are particularly useful when installing and adjusting
antennas. To measure SWR, simply connect the SWR meter between
the transmitter and the transmission line as shown in Fig. 10.7.
Because SWR measurements require only a minimum amount of
power, you can make SWR measurements without causing interfer-
ence to other ham operators. After an initial sensitivity adjustment, the
SWR can be read directly from the meter scale.
High-Frequency Antennas
The antenna is one of the most important elements in amateur opera-
tion. When transmitting, the antenna converts radio-frequency energy
into electromagnetic waves for radiation into space. For receiving, the
antenna collects electromagnetic waves and converts these waves into
electrical energy for input into the receiver. In general, the gain and
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 333
direction of maximum radiation (or maximum reception) depends on
the shape of the antenna.
Antennas used in amateur radio communications are available in
many types, sizes, and shapes. This discussion of amateur antennas is
limited to those types most suited for Technician operation, namely
the half-wave doublet, quarter-wave vertical, and the beam antenna.
Half-wave doublet (or dipole) antenna
Antenna operation involving the radiation and reception of RF signals
is an extremely complex process that engineers and scientists describe
TABLE 10.1. Typical coaxial cabletransmission lines used in Amateur Radio
installations.
Attenuation in db/100 feet (30 meters)
(also expressed as transmission efficiency in percent)
Charst. O.D.
ype of imped. inches 3.5 7 14 21 28
cable ZO ohms (mm) MHz MHz MHz MHz MHz Notes
RG-8/U 50 0.405 0.30 0.45 0.66 0.83 0.98 1, 2, 3
(10.3) (93) (90) (86) (83) (80)
RG-11/U 75 0.405 0.38 0.55 0.80 1.0 1.15 1, 2, 3
(10.3) (92) (88) (83) (79) (77)
RG-8X 50 0.242 0.56 0.78 1.1 1.4 1.5 4, 5
(6.1) (87) (84) (78) (72) (71)
RG-58/U 50 0.195 0.68 1.0 1.5 1.9 2.2 2, 3
(5.0) (86) (79) (71) (65) (69)
RG-59/U 73 0.242 0.64 0.90 1.3 1.6 1.8 1, 2, 3
(6.1) (86) (81) (74) (69) (66)
Notes: 1. “A” versions (for example, RG-8A/U) have an improved weather resistant which ensures a
longer life in outdoor installations.
2. The velocity of propagation factor for these cables is 66 percent.
3. These cables are available with a polyfoam, or “foam,” dielectric material to reduce attenua-
tion factors.
4. The velocity of propagation factor for this cable is 78 percent.
5. Attenuation factors and transmission efficiency values for this cable are approximated, based
on values available for other frequencies.
334 CHAPTER TEN
in terms of mathematical analysis. However, we can employ some fun-
damental concepts that will help to explain how antennas work.
Because the half-wave dipole antenna is a basic form of an antenna, we
will use this as a starting point.
When a radio-frequency current flows in a dipole, electric and mag-
netic fields are generated along the antenna conductors or elements. If
the dipole antenna has a physical length of one-half wavelength, it acts
as a resonant circuit at half the wavelength frequency. Figure 10.8A
shows a half-wave dipole antenna connected to a transmitter through
a transmission line. The relationship between the physical length of a
half-wave antenna and the operating frequency is given by:
L  1/2 λ  feet, or (Eq. 10.2)
L  1/2 λ  meters (Eq. 10.3)142.6
fMHz
468
fMHz
A direct-reading standing-wave ratio (SWR) meter.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 6
Test connections for making standing-wave ratio measurements.
Short length of coaxial cable
XMTR SWR
meter
Transmission line
To antenna
F I G U R E 1 0 . 7
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 335
where
L is the length of the half-wave antenna in feet or meters
λ is the symbol for wavelength
fMHz is the frequency in MHz
In theory, the length of a half-wave dipole is about 5 percent longer
than indicated by the above equations. However, additional loading
effects of insulators and supporting wires result in end effects. This
correction applies for wire-type antennas up to about 30 MHz.
When installed in free space, the half-wave dipole presents a pure
resistance of 73 ohms to the transmission line. Figure 10-8B shows
how the antenna appears to the transmission line and the transmitter.
This input resistance, sometimes called radiation resistance, of the
antenna is defined as the voltage applied to the antenna terminals
divided by the current flowing into the antenna.
Characteristics of the half-wave dipole antenna in free space. (A) The half-wave dipole
antenna. (B) Half-wave dipole antenna appears as 73-ohm resistor to transmission line.
(C) Voltage and current standing waves developed on half-wave dipole antenna. (D)
Electric and magnetic fields created by half-wave antenna during one-half RF cycle.
XMTR
XMTR
XMTR
Current Voltage
Electric
fields
Magnetic
fields
73 Ohms
1/2
A B
C D
XMTR
F I G U R E 1 0 . 8
336 CHAPTER TEN
The radio-frequency currents generated by the transmitter produce
standing waves of voltage and current along the length of the antenna. This
is illustrated in Fig. 10.8C. The voltage standing wave is highest at each
end and drops to zero at the center of the antenna. The current standing
wave is out of phase with the voltage wave and is a maximum at the cen-
ter. The dipole is referred to as a center-fed device with current-feed char-
acteristics. As stated earlier, the impedance or resistance at the center is 73
ohms—this value increases to about 2500 ohms at each end of the antenna.
The voltage and current standing waves produce alternating electric
and magnetic fields. These fields change direction during each cycle of
the RF current. Figure 10.8D shows orientation and direction of the alter-
nating fields during one-half of an RF cycle.
Radiation of electromagnetic waves is created when the alternating
electric and magnetic fields attempt to collapse back toward the
antenna. However, new fields being created by the next half cycle push
the preceding fields into space, which is the mechanics of radiation.
LONG AND SHORT DIPOLES
If the dipole antenna is made longer or shorter than a half-wave length,
the input impedance no longer acts as a 73-ohm resistor. Instead, it
presents a complex impedance with inductive or capacitive loading
effects to the transmission line. Figure 10.9 illustrates the results and
corrective action when we cut the dipole too long or too short.
A dipole antenna whose length is greater than one-half wavelength
(but less than one wavelength) acts as an inductor in series with a
resistor. Capacitance can be added to shorten the electrical length to an
equivalent half wavelength. The capacitance cancels out the inductive
effect and the antenna appears purely resistive to the transmission
line. Of course, we can also correct for the inductive reactance by
shortening the antenna.
When the dipole antenna length is less than one-half wavelength,
the load presented to the transmission line appears as a capacitor in
series with a resistor. Adding inductors in each leg of the dipole can-
cels the capacitive effect, leaving only the resistive load. This is one
way that amateurs “tune” short antennas when space restrictions
prevent installation of half-wave dipoles. Vertical antennas can also
be made physically short if an inductive loading coil is installed in
the vertical element.
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 337
RADIATION PATTERNS FROM DIPOLE ANTENNAS
The radiation from a half-wave dipole is strongest on each side of the
axis of orientation and decreases to a minimum at the ends. Figure
10.10A shows a plot of the radiation pattern of a dipole from a view
looking down on the antenna. For example, if you desire an antenna
orientation with maximum radiation in a north-south direction, you
must install the antenna in an east-west line.
The radiation pattern of a dipole antenna changes when it is
installed above a ground surface. The ground acts as a mirror and
waves striking the ground will be reflected into space. To illustrate
this, Fig. 10.10B shows an end view of the radiation pattern of a dipole
antenna in free space.
If the dipole is installed about one-fourth wavelength above a good
conductive ground (damp or moist soil), high-angle radiation will be
created due to some of the waves being reflected by the ground. This
radiation pattern, shown in Fig. 10.10C, is useful for contacts on 80
Effects of antenna length on transmission lines.
Antenna length Equivalent circuit Corrective action
1/2
Length greater
than one-half
wavelength
Length less than
one-half
wavelength
73 Ohms
R L C C
L L
Inductive load
None required
Add capacitance
Add inductance
Capacitive load
F I G U R E 1 0 . 9
338 CHAPTER TEN
and 40 meters out of about 200 miles (320 kilometers). However, this
high-angle radiation is not effective for long DX contacts.
In general, raising the dipole antenna higher above ground lowers
the radiation angle. Figure 10.10D shows the radiation pattern when
the antenna height is about one wavelength. This results in four dis-
tinct lobes, or maximum radiation angles. It should be noted that the
type and condition of the ground is important for it to act as a mirror
to radio waves. A heavy rain, for example, can raise the effective
ground level for an antenna, pushing up the angle of radiation.
RADIATION RESISTANCE CHANGES WITH ANTENNA HEIGHT
We stated earlier that the radiation resistance of a half-wave dipole in
free space is 73 ohms. Installing this antenna above a ground surface
will cause the radiation resistance to vary from about 95 ohms down to
Some typical radiation patterns of half-wavelength dipole antennas. (A) Horizontal pat-
tern, sometimes called a “figure-eight” pattern. (B) End view of radiation pattern of a
dipole in free space. (C) Vertical pattern of a dipole installed one-fourth wavelength
above a reflecting surface. (D) Vertical pattern of a dipole installed one wavelength
above a reflecting surface.
A B
C D
30°
60° 90° 60°
30° 15°
50° 50°
15°
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 0
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 339
almost zero ohms. Figure 10.11 shows how the radiation resistance for
a half-wave dipole will vary with respect to its height above ground.
This graph can help you in selecting the type of transmission line to be
used with your antennas. In general, 75-ohm coaxial cable is suitable
for dipole or doublet antennas installed at heights of one-fourth wave-
length or higher. Below heights of one-fourth wavelength, the 50-ohm
coaxial cable should be used.
PRACTICAL HALF-WAVE DOUBLET ANTENNAS
The half-wave doublet or dipole antenna is a simple but effective
antenna for the Technician HF bands, particularly 80- and 40-meter
Radiation resistance of half-wave horizontal dipole antenna installed at varying heights
above the ground.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 1/4 1/2 3/4 1 1 1/4 11/2 13/4 2 21/4 21/2
Radiation resistance-ohms
Antenna height above ground-wavelengths
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 1
340 CHAPTER TEN
bands. This antenna can be installed with a minimum of time and mate-
rials. Figure 10.12 shows some of the practical details for installing the
doublet antenna. Also, you can pick up most of the coaxial cable and
antenna wire from swap-fests or auction nights at the local ham club.
Many of the experienced hams will be glad to help you install the antenna
or answer any questions you might have on parts or installation problems.
Safety and other considerations
Prior to any actual installation of antennas, poles, or tower work, you
should be aware of all related safety rules. The installation manual for
any new equipment, including antenna kits, will have safety instruc-
tions concerning installation and grounding procedures. Read these
carefully because they might save your life or the life of another per-
son helping you with the installation. Additional suggestions for your
safety are as follows:
 Connect all major electronic equipment (transmitter, receiver,
antenna tuner, and other components) with a ground terminal,
to a common ground. Chapter 11 provides additional informa-
tion on this procedure.
 When installing or working on an antenna mounted on a tower,
always use a safety belt to ensure maximum safety. While on the
tower, be sure that no power (RF or 60-Hz ac power) is applied
to antennas or other equipment on the tower. Battery-operated
tools, such as drills or soldering guns, are recommended instead
of 120-V ac operated tools.
 People on the ground, helping with installers on the tower,
should wear protective items such as hard hats and safety
glasses. This will prevent falling objects from injuring the per-
sons on the ground.
 Never install an antenna close to an electric power line. During
installation, a wire or part of the tower could fall against the
power line and cause severe burns or fatal electric shock to peo-
ple on or near the tower. After installation, there is always the
possibility that the power line might be blown or fall across the
antenna installation. This could result in dangerously high volt-
ages being conducted inside the ham shack.
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 341
A practical half-wave doublet antenna installation.
HF
transceiver
Length of half-wave doublet
1 2 1 2 1 2 1
3
4
5
6
7
Nearby
water pipe
(If a water pipe is not available, a ground rod
should be installed close to the point
that the transmission line enters the building.)
Band Length
Feet Meters
80M
40M
15M
10M
124
65
22
16.6
38
20
6.8
5.1
Antenna and Supporting Wire: #14 Copper or
Copperweld Bare Antenna Wire, Belden #8000
or Radio Shack 278-1329.
Antenna Insulators: Radio Shack "Dog Bone"
278-1336 or equal.
Coaxial cable, RG-8/U(foam) 52 Ohm, Belden 8214
or Radio Shack 278-1312.
RF Connector, PL-259 "UHF", Plug, Radio Shack
278-205 or equal.
Lightning Arrestor, Cushcraft "Blitz Bug" Model
LAC-1, LAC-2, or equal.
Coupler, PL-258, Female, "UHF", Radio Shack
278-1369.
Ground Wire, #8 Aluminum, Belden 8018 or Radio
Shack 15-035.
Ground Rod and Clamp, 8-feet, Copper Plated, Radio
Shack 15-529 or equal.
As req'd
3
As req'd
3 Min.
1
As req'd
As req'd
As req'd
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Item Quantity Description
Material
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 2
342 CHAPTER TEN
 Install the antenna with as much clearance away from nearby
objects as possible. Trees, buildings, power or telephone lines,
or metal fences will distort the radiation pattern as well as
change the radiation resistance.
 Cut the transmission line at the point where it enters the side of
the building and install PL-259 (or equivalent) coaxial connec-
tors on each end. Using a PL-258 (or equivalent) coaxial coupler,
install a coaxial static discharge unit between the two ends of
the coaxial cable. Now connect a No. 12 bare copper ground
wire between the coaxial static discharge unit and a water pipe
or a ground rod.
The installation of the coaxial static discharge unit serves two
important functions. First it allows a discharge path for the buildup of
static electricity on the antenna wires. During electrical storms, this
electrical potential can build up to thousands of volts, possibly caus-
ing electrical shock to the operator or damage to the ham equipment.
The second reason for installing the coaxial static discharge unit is
that of protection against direct lightning striking the antenna. Some-
times, however, any protection short of disconnecting the antenna
from the ham equipment might not be effective against a direct light-
ning strike. The coaxial static discharge unit does not guarantee that
the lighting will not enter the ham shack—it only reduces the possi-
bility of such an occurrence. During inactive periods or in case of an
impending storm, you are strongly urged to disconnect the coaxial
cable from the ham equipment. However, don’t do this during a
storm—a bolt of lightning could strike the antenna the instant you take
hold of the coaxial cable. In any event, never operate your ham rig dur-
ing storm conditions.
In the event you do not have a space for installing a conventional
half-wave doublet, an inverted-vee antenna will do almost as well. An
inverted-vee consists of a half-wave doublet with one or both elements
slanted down toward the ground and the center section installed as high
as possible. A suggested inverted-vee antenna is shown in Fig. 10.13.
You can use a telescoping TV mast for the center section of the
inverted-vee antenna. This will provide a height of about 30 to 45 feet.
If the upper section of the mast is attached to the gable of your house,
this will reduce guying requirements. To prevent interaction of the guy
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 343
wires with the antenna, be sure to break up the guy wires into short
sections joined by insulators. Any section of guy wire should not be
greater than about one-eighth wavelength of the operating frequency.
Also, the angle between the “drooping” legs of the doublet should
never be less than 90 degrees. Otherwise, a smaller angle will cause
cancellation of the radio waves and less radiating efficiency. Install the
antenna with about 2 or 3 percent of additional wire on each end. The
added wire can be folded back from the insulator and wrapped around
the antenna wire. Having this extra length of wire will allow you to
“prune” the antenna to the desired frequency of operation.
To test and adjust the antenna, connect an SWR meter in the trans-
mission line as shown in Fig. 10.7. It is a good idea to measure the
SWR over the antenna’s range of operation at about 10.kHz steps and
plot these readings on a graph. This shows you if the resonant fre-
quency falls within the Technician portion of the band or if the
antenna is too long or too short. Figure 10.14 illustrates a typical set of
readings for each condition. Using the SWR approach requires that
you transmit a test signal for each SWR reading. If you are a Novice
Inverted-vee half-wave antenna.
Coax
TV mast
Grounding wire
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 3
344 CHAPTER TEN
operator, you are limited to emitting test signals within the Technician
bands. Also, remember that your test signal should be adjusted to the
lowest level possible so that you will not interfere with other amateurs
operating on the same frequencies. By plotting the SWR readings on a
graph you can get a rough indication of the antenna’s resonant fre-
quency even though it may fall outside of the Technician band. This is
shown by the dotted lines on the graphs in Fig. 10.14.
Newer forms of SWR meters, designated as antenna analyzers, are
available that will let you check the performance of an antenna at any
frequency within the range of the antenna analyzer. This instrument
has a low-level internal oscillator along with the SWR circuitry, elim-
Resonant frequency is below 7100 kHz. Antenna is too long and
should be shortened.
Resonant frequency is about 7125 kHz. Center of Technician amateur
40-meter band.
Resonant frequency is above 7150 kHz. Antenna is too short and
should be lengthened.
A.
B.
C.
Curve Comments
Note: Allotted novice frequencies is indicated by solid lines.
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
7070 7080 7090 7100 7110 7120 7130 7140 7150 7160 7170
A
B
C
Frequency - kHz
S
W
R
R
e
a
d
i
n
g
s
Typical SWR curves for a 40-meter antenna.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 4
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 345
inating the need for using your transmitter in SWR measurements. Fig-
ure 10.15 shows antenna analyzers marketed by MFJ Enterprises Inc.
You merely connect the antenna analyzer to the antenna being tested,
tune the analyzer’s internal oscillator to the desired frequency, and
read the SWR on the analyzer’s meter.
If the resonant frequency does not fall within the desired band of
frequencies, the slope of the SWR plot indicates whether the antenna
Antenna SWR antenna analyzers. These innovative, portable devices permit SWR mea-
surements of amateur antennas over an entire band without the need for a transmitter,
SWR meter, or other equipment. (A) The MFJ HF/VHF SWR Antenna Analyzer covers a
frequency range of 1.8 to 170 MHz. This provides a capability to measure SWR in all the
HF bands as well as the 6-meter and 2-meter bands. The antenna analyzer has a built-
in frequency counter for precise frequency measurements and also measures RF imped-
ance (Z), resistance (R), and phase angles. (B) The MFJ-219 UHF SWR Analyzer covers
420 to 470 MHz for the 70-cm band and provides an output jack for a frequency meter
for accurate frequency measurements. Courtesy of MFJ Enterprises Inc., P.O. Box 494, Mis-
sissippi State, MS 39762; Telephone: (601) 323-5869
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 5
346 CHAPTER TEN
is too long or too short. Vary the antenna length about 1 inch (2.5 cen-
timeters) in the required direction and recheck the SWR readings. In
this manner you will be able to bring the resonant frequency of the
antenna to the desired frequency.
Some amateurs prefer to use an antenna-impedance bridge or noise
bridge for measuring antenna impedances and the resonant frequency.
Figure 10.16 shows a typical noise bridge that allows you to measure
the resistance and reactance (inductive or capacitive) characteristics of
an antenna at any frequency. This and similar noise bridge test instru-
ments are powered by an attached battery. Because this type of device
does not require the use of a transmitter test signal, it affords portable
operation, even testing at the antenna input terminals. Furthermore,
the antenna noise bridge can be used by the Technician operator at fre-
quencies outside of the Technician bands.
The antenna noise bridge shown in Fig. 10.16, called the R-X Noise
Bridge, is manufactured by Palomar Engineers. It consists of a noise
generator and a bridge circuit for measuring resistive, capacitive, and
inductive characteristics. An HF receiver is required as a detector for
the bridge circuit. When the R and XC-XL controls are adjusted for a
mull (minimum noise out of the receiver), their dial settings are read
directly in resistance and reactance.
The Palomar Model RX-10 R-X Noise Bridge. This handy, portable test instrument is useful
in measuring the electrical characteristics (resistance and reactance) of RF devices such
as antennas. Palomar Engineers, P.O. Box 462222, Escondido, CA; Telephone: (619) 747-3343
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 6
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 347
Multiband antennas
Many types of multiband antennas, covering 80 through 10 meters, can
be purchased from commercial sources or built from designs available
in amateur publications. One simple form of an HF multiband antenna
for Technician operation is shown in Fig. 10.17. This antenna consists
of four separate doublets connected to a common coaxial transmission
line such as RG-8/U. For optimum operation, each doublet should be
installed in a straight line and separated in direction from the other
doublets. A dipole antenna center connector is used to connect the dif-
ferent dipoles to common connections. This connector allows the coax-
ial cable to be firmly attached to the antenna as well as providing a
means for hanging the antenna from a mast or other support.
The inverted-vee antenna can be adapted for multiband operation
using separate “drooping” dipoles connected to the common trans-
mission line. Figure 10.18 shows how a typical three-band (80, 40, and
15 meters) inverted antenna can be installed in a minimum of space.
Another simple multiband antenna consists of a long wire connected
to an antenna tuner or transmatch. A simple long-wire antenna for 80
through 10 meters is shown in Fig. 10.19. This approach represents a
A simple multiband antenna (80, 40, 15, and 10 meters).
10M
40M
80M
15M
Coax
15M
80M
40M
10M
Diode antenna center connector
(Baker & Williamson CC50 or equivalent.)
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 7
348 CHAPTER TEN
Inverted-vee multiband antenna installation for 8, 40, 15, and 10 meters.
80M
40M
15M
Guy wire 15M 40M
80M
Ground
TV mast RG-8/U
Coaxial cable for
transmission line
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 8
A simple long-wire antenna for 80 through 10 meters.
Transmitter
or
transceiver 50-Ohm coax
SWR
meter Antenna
tuning
unit #12-14 Copper wire
For best operation down
to 80 meters. This length
should be about 130 feet
(40 meters).
#14 Copperweld wire, bare
#14 Insulated
copper wire
F I G U R E 1 0 . 1 9
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 349
compromise and is used primarily when
only limited space is available for installing
antennas. One disadvantage of this type of
installation is that one end of the antenna is
brought into the ham shack causing strong
RF fields. These fields can interfere with the
operation of the ham equipment or nearby
TV, AM radio, or hi-fi sets. Another disad-
vantage is that long-wire antennas with
lengths of one wavelength or more produce
highly directional radiation patterns.
The antenna tuner is used to match the transmitter and transmission
line to the varying impedances of the long-wire antenna. As we switch
from one band to another, the impedance presented by the antenna
might shift to inductive or capacitive loading effects. The antenna
tuner “tunes” out these reactive effects by adding capacitance or induc-
tance to the antenna circuit. One form of an antenna tuner, shown in
Fig. 10.20, consists of a variable inductor and capacitor. A commercial
antenna tuner is illustrated in Fig. 10.21. The more elaborate models
may contain a built-in SWR meter.
A simple antenna tuner.
To
transceiver
Variable
inductor
Variable
capacitor
To random length
wire antenna
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 0
The MFJ Enterprises Model MFJ-971 HF Portable Antenna Tuner. This compact antenna
tuner covers the 1.8–30 MHz frequency range with power levels up to 300 watts. The
MFJ-971 allows you to match virtually all types of transmission lines to your amateur
HF transceiver, such as coaxial cables and even random lengths of wire. This antenna
tuner has a unique “Cross-Needle” SWR/watt meter with two switchable power ranges
of 30 and 300 watts.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 1
350 CHAPTER TEN
Vertical antennas
The quarter-wavelength vertical antenna, sometimes referred to as a
Marconi antenna, provides good low-angle radiation for long-haul DX
contacts. It is also useful for installation in limited space. One disad-
vantage of the vertical antenna is that it does not provide as much gain
as the horizontal half-wave doublet. A simple quarter-wavelength ver-
tical antenna is shown in Fig. 10.22.
The operation of the quarter-wavelength vertical antenna is similar
to that of the half-wave dipole because the ground plane reflects a mir-
ror image of the vertical section. Voltage and current standing waves
for the vertical antenna are illustrated in Fig. 10.23.
For optimum operation, the vertical antenna must be installed on a
good conductive ground plane. If the vertical antenna is to be installed
on dry rocky soil, radial wires or conductors at least one-quarter wave-
length long should be installed beneath the antenna. A minimum of
four radials should be used as the ground plane.
The radiation resistance of a quarter-wavelength vertical antenna
installed on a flat ground plane is about 30 ohms. An SWR of about 1.7
will be experienced if a 50-ohm coaxial transmission line is used. The
radiation resistance can be increased to about 50 ohms if a ground plane
consisting of four “drooping” radials is used. Each radial must be
A quarter-wavelength vertical antenna.
Coaxial cable
Ground surface
To transceiver
1/4
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 2
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 351
slanted down at an angle of about 45 degrees. Figure 10.24 shows a prac-
tical design for a quarter-wavelength vertical antenna that can be used
for Technician operation. The basic design for this antenna can be found
in the ARRL Antenna Manual. Commercial vertical antennas for ama-
teur operation are available from various sources. Figure 10.25 shows a
typical commercial amateur vertical antenna.
Many multiband vertical antennas use resonant traps for isolating
different sections to obtain the desired quarter-wavelength operation.
Figure 10.26 illustrates how a multiband vertical antenna can be con-
structed using traps. This type of antenna operates at optimum when
installed over a perfect conductive ground plane. Sometimes, many
radials are installed to achieve such a ground plane. The multiband ver-
tical antenna is popular with hams who do not have space for installing
other forms of antennas. You can also use resonant traps in the con-
struction of horizontal half-wave doublets. Many amateur publications
or antenna handbooks provide specific details for antenna construction.
Beam antennas
In general, amateur operation on bands up to and including 40
meters can be accomplished quite well using half-wave doublets or
Voltage and current distribution for a quarter-wavelength vertical antenna.
1/4
1/4
XMTR
“Mirror image”
Ground surface
Current standing waveVoltage standing wave
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 3
352 CHAPTER TEN
quarter-wavelength verticals. The vertical angle of radiation and
polarization (vertical or horizontal) characteristics are relatively
unimportant on these bands. Above these bands, and particularly on
10 meters, many long-haul DX contacts cannot be made without
high-gain directional antennas. Fortunately, antenna structures are
smaller at these shorter wavelengths. This makes the construction
and installation of small rotatable antennas that can be pointed in the
desired direction of propagation practical.
Multiband beam or Yagi antennas with two or more elements are
commonly used by amateurs on the bands above 40 meters to obtain
A practical quarter-wavelength antenna for the Technician HF bands.
Vertical element
Aluminum tubing (If practical,
a #14 copperweld bare wire can be
installed using insulators at each
end).
Wooden support
Insulators RG-8/U Coaxial cable
To transceiver
Ground plane
Four radials, #14 copper weld
wire installed at a
45-degree angle.
Operating band
80 M
40 M
15 M
10 M
Length of vertical
element
Feet Meters
Length of each
radial element
Feet Meters
63.5
33.2
11.3
8.5
19.4
10.1
3.4
2.6
66.7
34.9
11.8
9.0
20.3
10.6
3.6
2.7
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 4
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 353
high gain and directivity. By arranging a
series of elements in a plane as shown in
Fig. 10.27, an antenna array with high gain
and narrow beamwidth can be obtained.
An important advantage during reception
is that antenna gain is reduced off to the
sides and the back of the antenna. This
minimizes interference from signals in
other directions.
The beam or Yagi antenna provides
considerable gain over that of dipoles or
vertical antennas and is an excellent
antenna for DX contacts. The spacing
between elements is on the order of 0.15
to 0.2 wavelengths for maximum gain. A
simple transmission line is shown to
illustrate how this antenna is fed. In
actual practice, some form of impedance
matching device must be used to couple
the antenna to the transmission lines.
The radiation resistance of a three-ele-
ment beam is on the order of 10 ohms. If
a second director element is added to
increase the gain, the radiation resistance
drops to the vicinity of 4 to 6 ohms. Man-
ufacturers of amateur beam antennas use
various techniques for matching the low-
impedance antenna feedpoints to 50-ohm
coaxial cable.
A typical four-element beam antenna is shown in Fig. 10.28. This
type of antenna provides excellent gain and directivity characteris-
tics on 20, 15, and 10 meters. Note that this antenna uses resonant
traps to obtain multiband operation. Antennas of this type can easily
be installed on towers and rotated with antenna rotating systems.
The antenna shown in Fig. 10.28 provides a forward gain of 8.9 dB on
all specified bands and will handle up to 2 kilowatts of RF power.
The nominal input impedance is 50, ohms and cable such as RG-8/U
can be used to feed the antenna.
The cushcraft Model R-7 HF Vertical Antenna. This
high-performance, half-wave vertical antenna covers
all amateur bands from 10 meters to 40 meters. The
R-7 features low SWR over specified portions of each
amateur band, a power rating of 1800 watts pep, and
low radiation angle of 16 degrees for long distance
DX contacts. Topping only 22.5 feet (or 7 meters) in
height and requiring no ground radials, this antenna
can easily be installed almost anywhere.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 5
354 CHAPTER TEN
A multiband vertical antenna for 40, 15, and 10 meters.
40-Meter
operation
15-Meter
operation
10-Meter
operation
Trap tuned for 21.15 MHz
Trap tuned for 28.15 MHz
Coaxial cable
To transceiver
Minimum ground plane
four radials. Equally spaced,
cut for the lowest frequency
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 6
The beam or Yagi antenna.
Direction of
maximum radiation
L1 L2
Transmission line
to transceiver
Reflector element
approximately 5% longer
than driven element.
Driven element, length is about
455 feet or 139 meters.
FMHz FMHz
Director element, approximately 5%
shorter than the driven element.
One or more directors
can be used with
this antenna.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 7
ALL ABOUT TRANSMISSION LINES AND ANTENNAS 355
Station wiring diagrams
We have now covered transmitters, receivers, transmission lines, and
antennas. Next we examine station wiring diagrams. The FCC has a
number of questions that relate to station configurations. Every possi-
ble combination is not shown. Develop some of the required station
configurations yourself to help in the learning process!
Figure 10.29A shows a station consisting of a transmitter, receiver,
transmit-receive switch, transmission line, and an antenna. This is one
of the simplest configurations. If a transceiver is substituted for the
transmitter and receiver, then the transmit-receive switch is not
required as this function is built into the transceiver.
The addition of an SWR meter and an antenna tuner to the first con-
figuration provides the operator with the capability to present a low
SWR to the transmitter. This equipment configuration is illustrated in
Fig. 10.29B.
The last configuration shows an amateur radio station with a trans-
mitter, receiver, transmission line, antenna, transmit-receive switch,
grounding provisions, and a telegraph key. This is shown in Fig. 10.29C.
The Cushcraft Model A4S 20-15-10 Meter Beam Antenna. This four-element beam
antenna features high gain and excellent directional characteristics.
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 8
356 CHAPTER TEN
Typical amateur station wiring for transmitter-receiver combinations.
Transmission line
Transmitter
Receiver
Transmission
line
Transmission line
Transmitter
Receiver
A
Transmit-receive
switch
Transmit-receive
switch
SWR
meter Antenna
tuner
Antenna
Antenna
B
Transmitter
Receiver
Antenna
Transmit-receive
switch
C
Key
Ground
F I G U R E 1 0 . 2 9
This chapter provides a review of the required amateur radio commu-
nications practices and operating procedures. First, we will cover
the recent FCC Rules on RF Environmental Safety Practices, which
apply to three questions on the Technician Class Element 2 Examina-
tion. The next sections will provide information and recommenda-
tions for the design, installation, and operation of your amateur radio
station. The FCC expects you to know this material for the Technician
exam and subsequent operation of your amateur radio station (the
exam contains five questions on operating procedures). Understand-
ing the material and related questions in the Technician Question Pool
(see Appendix A) is crucial to passing the Technician Examination,
Element 2!
Definitions
Ammeter The ammeter is an instrument (i.e., test equipment) for
measuring current flow (amperes) in an electrical circuit. It can be
designed to measure either ac or dc current.
RF Radiation Safety and Radio
Communications Practices and
Procedures
11
357
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
358 CHAPTER ELEVEN
Average power The time-averaged rate of energy transfer.
Controlled environment For FCC purposes, this applies to human
exposure to RF radiation when people are exposed as a consequence of
their employment and after those who are exposed have been made
fully aware of the potential for exposure and can exercise control over
their exposure. This includes amateur radio operators and their imme-
diate families.
Decibels (dB) A mathematical expression, decibels are equal to
ten times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of two power levels.
A complete description of decibels and how to calculate them is given
in Chap. 7. Decibel calculation is a convenient way to express the gain
(or loss) of amplifiers and small and large power, voltage, and current
levels.
Duty factor Applied to RF safety requirements, duty factor is
defined as a measure (or ratio) of the total time that an RF transmitter
is turned “on” (say 20 minutes) to the total observation time, usually
30 minutes. The duty factor in this observation period would be 20
minutes divided by 30 minutes, or 0.667. Note that a duty factor of 1.0
corresponds to continuous “on” operation of the transmitter.
Effective radiated power (ERP) Transmitted power being radiated
in a given direction. The ERP is equal to the RF power supplied to the
antenna multiplied by the antenna gain. Thus an RF transmitter pro-
viding 100 watts of power to an antenna with a gain of 5 will produce
an ERP of 500 watts in a given direction.
Exposure Exposure occurs whenever and wherever a person is
subjected to electric, magnetic, or electromagnetic fields produced by
a RF transmitter.
Far field That region of the antenna’s electromagnetic field, a
great distance from the antenna in terms of wavelengths, where the
wave front has a plane wave with uniform characteristics.
Gain (of an antenna) Usually expressed in decibels, the gain of
the subject antenna is determined by comparison with a “standard
antenna,” such as a half-wavelength dipole or an isotropic radiator.
General population/uncontrolled exposure For FCC purposes,
this applies to human exposure to RF fields when the general public is
exposed or when persons who are exposed as a consequence of their
employment may not be fully aware of the potential for exposure or
cannot exercise control over their exposure. Therefore, members of the
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 359
general public always fall under this category when exposure is
employment related.
Ground potential This is described as a zero voltage potential
with respect to ground or earth.
Ground rod A ground rod may be either a metal pipe or a rod dri-
ven into the ground for an electrical connection with the earth. A
buried cold-water (metallic only) pipe usually makes an excellent
ground connection.
Harmonic radiation This is defined as unintentional radiation of
signals whose frequencies are harmonics or multiples of the funda-
mental operating frequency.
Interference In terms of radio communications, interference is
the reception of undesired signals that interferes with the reception of
desired signals. Radio signals may also interfere with the performance
of other electronic equipment, such as audio systems.
Interfering signals present in the broadcast bands are called broad-
cast interference (BCI).
Interfering signals in the television bands are called television
interference (TVI).
Low-pass filter A low-pass filter passes all signal frequencies
below a critical frequency and reflects higher frequency signals. Some
amateurs use a low-pass filter between the transmitter and transmis-
sion line to prevent radiation of harmonic or spurious signals above 10
meters. This is an effective way of eliminating TVI.
Maximum permissible exposure (MPE) The maximum permissi-
ble electromagnetic field adjacent to the antenna that a person may be
exposed to without harmful effects and with an acceptable safety fac-
tor. It is to be noted that all amateur transmitters having a maximum
power output of 50 watts or less require only a routine evaluation for
RF safety. This means that as a rule, a transmitter output of 50 watts or
less will pose no threat to the amateur or nearby persons.
Near field The region adjacent to the antenna and nearby struc-
tures where the electromagnetic fields are the most intense and
nonuniform. For most antennas, the near-field boundary is estimated
to be about one-half wavelength from the antenna.
Ohmmeter The ohmmeter is an instrument for measuring resis-
tance (in ohms). The electrical power to a circuit must be turned off
during all resistance measurements.
360 CHAPTER ELEVEN
Peak envelope power (PEP) This is the average power supplied to
the antenna transmission line by a radio transmitter during one
radiofrequency cycle at the crest of the modulation envelope taken
under normal operating conditions.
Plate circuit This term is normally used to describe the external
circuit that is connected to the plate and cathode terminals of a vacuum
tube. The FCC refers to the “amplifier plate circuit” when describing
the plate and cathode connections to the final RF amplifier stage of a
tube-type transmitter or external tube-type RF power amplifier.
Power density (S) The instantaneous power density integrated
over a source repetition period.
Public service operation Amateurs provide a valuable public ser-
vice in terms of a voluntary noncommercial communications service,
particularly with respect to emergency communications.
Q signals This consists of a set of international abbreviated sig-
nals used primarily in Morse code communications. Each Q signal is a
three-letter group starting with the letter Q. For example, QTH means
“my location is —.” If followed by a question mark, the Q signal is a
question. For example, QTH? would be translated as “what is your
location?”
RST reporting system This is a signal-quality reporting system
used by amateurs and other communications activities. RST stands for
readability, strength, and tone. Numerals are used to indicate the qual-
ity of each characteristic, with scales of 0 to 5 for readability and 0 to
9 for both strength and tone. For example, a signal report of 5-9-9
means the received signal is “perfectly readable,” an “extremely strong
signal,” and a “perfect tone.”
Specific absorption rate (SAR) This is a measurement of the rate
of energy being absorbed by (or dissipated in) an incremental mass
contained in a volume element of dielectric material, such as biologi-
cal tissues. SAR is usually expressed in watts per kilogram (W/kg) or
milliwatts per gram.
Thermal effects As with microwave ovens, RF radiation at the
lower frequencies can produce heating effects within biological tissue.
If severe, this heating could have adverse effects.
Universal coordinated time (UTC) This is a worldwide system of
keeping time. The National Bureau of Standards standard time and fre-
quency broadcast stations, WWV and WWVH, broadcast time signals
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 361
based on the UTC time system. The specific hour and minute stated is
actually the time zone centered around Greenwich, England. This time
system is based on a 24-hour system—the hours are numbered begin-
ning with 00 hours at midnight to 23 hours, 59 minutes just before the
next midnight. For example, 12 hours would be noon and 18 hours
would be 6:00 pm.
Voltmeter The voltmeter is an instrument for measuring voltage
(volts) or differences of potential. Voltmeters may be designed to mea-
sure ac or dc voltages.
Wattmeter This is an instrument for measuring the electrical
power being delivered to a circuit and is usually calibrated in units of
watts or kilowatts. Wattmeters are available for measuring ac or dc
power. For example, an RF wattmeter can be connected in the trans-
mission line between the transmitter and the antenna in order to mea-
sure the amount of RF power being delivered to the antenna.
Radio Frequency Environmental Safely Practices
FCC rules and regulations require every amateur radio operator to
evaluate the RF environment surrounding his or her amateur station
and antenna installations. You must insure that all persons in the
vicinity of your station are not exposed to excessive RF radiation. Here
the FCC identifies two categories. The first or immediate group,
including the amateur operator, the amateur’s family, and other per-
sons who are aware of the RF radiation, are in a Controlled Environ-
ment. An Uncontrolled Environment is the area around the amateur
station where persons, unaware of the RF radiation, may be present.
Persons in this category include neighbors and the general public.
Excessive RF radiation is defined by the FCC in terms of Maximum
Permissible Exposure (MPE). If a preliminary evaluation indicates that
your antennas are producing RF electromagnetic fields in excess of the
FCC limits, you must take immediate action to correct this potential
hazard. Simple steps such as reducing the RF power output of your
transmitter(s) to recommended levels or elevating the antennas and
installing them away from buildings may be the best solution.
In general, amateur radio is a relatively safe hobby in terms of RF
radiation hazards. The typical amateur radio transmitter power levels
rarely exceed the FCC radiated power limits. Again, sometimes all that
362 CHAPTER ELEVEN
may be needed is to reduce the power level. It is to be noted here that
the FCC requires the amateur radio operator to operate with the mini-
mum power required to successfully complete a contact. Why use 100
watts of RF power when 5 watts may be sufficient when contacting a
nearby amateur on a VHF repeater?
Considerable research by the FCC and other organizations has been
conducted on human exposure to RF electromagnetic radiation. Two
important findings of this research are as follows:
1. High levels of thermal or heating effects of RF radiation can cause
serious heat damage to biological tissue. The magnitude of these
heating effects will vary with the frequency (and wavelength),
power density, and propagation factors of the radiation field. Also,
the physical size or height of a person can create a “natural reso-
nance” which causes maximum heating effects. These resonant
effects are most dominant in the 30- to 300-MHz frequency range.
Individual body parts such as the head will resonate at frequencies
about 400 MHz, and eyes will resonate at certain microwave fre-
quencies. For example, excessive RF heating effects in the human
eye may cause cataracts to form.
2. Nonthermal or nonheating RF radiation, usually associated with
low-level RF and low-frequency energy fields, may have some bio-
logical effect on living beings, such as humans and animals. This
includes ac (60 Hz) power-line radiation. Long-term statistical stud-
ies have produced no definite link between this radiation and any
health problems. We can expect considerable research in the future
concerning the effects of RF radiation on humans and animals.
The applicable FCC documents concerning RF safety are the FCC
Part 1 and Office of Engineering and Technology (ORT) Bulletin 65.
You may want to obtain a copy of ORT Bulletin 65, “Evaluating Com-
pliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency
Electromagnetic Fields.” This bulletin provides a summary of the
FCC limits for maximum permissible exposure (MPE) in reference to
specific frequencies. Table 11.1, provided in OET Bulletin 65, shows
these MPE values for two conditions, Occupational/Controlled Expo-
sure and General Population/Uncontrolled Exposure. The key to this
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 363
TABLE 11.1 The FCC Limits for Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) to RF
radiation in Reference to Frequency Bands. (Covers both Occupational/
Controlled and General Population/Uncontrolled Exposure Limits)
A. Limits for Occupational/Controlled Exposure
Frequency Electric field Magnetic field Power Averaging time
range Strength (E) strength (H) density (S) |E|2
, |H|2 or S
(MHz) (V/m) (A/m) (mW/cm2) (minutes)
0.3–3.0 614 1.63 (100)* 6
3.0–30 18–12/F 4.89/F (900/F)° 6
30–300 61.4 0.165 1.0 6
300–1500 — — F/300 6
1500–100,000 — — 5 6
B. Limits for General Population/Uncontrolled Exposure
Frequency Electric field Magnetic field Power Averaging time
range Strength (E) strength (H) density (S) |E|2
, |H|2 or S
(MHz) (V/m) (A/m) (mW/cm2) (minutes)
0.3–1.34 614 1.63 (100)* 30
1.34–30 124/F 2.19/F (180/F)° 30
30–300 27.5 0.073 0.2 30
300–1500 — — F/1500 30
1500–100,000 — — 1.0 30
F = frequency in MHz
*Plane-wave equivalent power density
Note 1: Occupational/controlled limits apply in situations in which persons are exposed as a consequence
of their employment provided those persons are fully aware of the potential for exposure and can exer-
cise control over their exposure. Limits for occupational/controlled exposure also apply in situations
when an individual is transient through a location where occupational/controlled limits apply provided
he or she is made aware of the potential for exposure.
Note 2: General population/uncontrolled exposures apply in situations in which the general public may be
exposed, or in which persons that are exposed as a consequence of their employment may not be fully
aware of the potential for exposure or can not exercise control over their exposure.
364 CHAPTER ELEVEN
table contains the maximum power density in mW/cm 2 (milliwatts
per square centimeter). Prior research determined the whole body’s
specific absorption rate (SAR), the value on which the MPEs are
based.
Figure 11.1 incorporates the data given in Table 11.1 to provide a
graphical representation of the MPE limits in terms of a plane-wave
equivalent power density. Both types of environments are given, i.e.,
the Occupational/Controlled Exposure and the General Population/
Uncontrolled Exposure. Both Table 11.1 and Fig. 11.1 show the follow-
ing conclusions:
1. The human body absorbs energy differently at various frequencies.
The most stringent frequency band for RF radiation exposure is that
of the 30 to 300 MHz (VHF). Human body resonance effects occur
in this region.
F I G U R E 1 1 . 1
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 365
2. Regarding the microwave region (about 1500 MHz and above),
intense RF radiation in these frequencies can cause severe heating
in human biological tissues. In particular, the eye’s resonant fre-
quency is highly susceptible to microwaves. The heating effect in
the ocular fluids can cause cataracts. This is one reason that you
should never look into the open end of a microwave feed horn
antenna when the transmitter is operating!
3. The FCC’s limits for maximum permissible exposure show that any
radiation tests must cover specified periods of time. In order to
determine compliance with the MPE levels, safe exposure levels for
RF energy are averaged as follows:
RF test environment Time period
Uncontrolled RF Environment 30 minutes
Controlled RF Environment 6 minutes
Determining Compliance with FCC RF Safety Rules and
Regulations
Every amateur radio operator must determine if his or her amateur
radio station is in compliance with the FCC RF safety requirements.
Even the applicant for an amateur license must indicate his or her
understanding of these requirements on an amateur radio license
application form at the time of application. As stated earlier, there will
be three questions concerning this on your Technician license exami-
nation. By learning this RF safety material now, you will be prepared
both for the Technician exam and subsequent operation of your ham
station.
To evaluate compliance with the FCC rules, the first step is to deter-
mine the RF power output of your transmitter(s) or transceiver(s). Part
97.13 states that you must perform the routine RF evaluation if the RF
power output of your station exceeds the limits given in Table 11.1.
That’s right! You don’t need to perform any further evaluation as long
as you don’t exceed these RF power limits. As an example, you have
the 5 WPM certification and want to operate on the 80-meter and 40-
meter CW bands. If you have a typical HF transceiver that provides
366 CHAPTER ELEVEN
100 watts output, Table 11.2 shows that
you are well within the RF output limits
for these two bands.
If your station RF power output
exceeds the power limits in Table 11.1,
you must perform a routine RF environ-
mental evaluation in accordance with FCC
rules and regulations. Remember, the pur-
pose of this evaluation is to ensure a safe
operating environment for amateurs, their
families, and their neighbors.
This evaluation can be performed using
one of three methods: direct power density
measurements, mathematical calculations,
or using reference tables. The first two of
these techniques are generally beyond the
capability of the average amateur operator.
For example, the complex test equipment is
too expensive for most amateurs. Also, con-
siderable skill and technical knowledge are
required for making and interpreting power
density measurements. The second tech-
nique involves predicting the theoretical
power density by applying mathematical
equations for “near-field” and “far-field”
electromagnetic field power intensities.
These equations take into account the
antenna gain, which varies with the type of
antenna being used.
The far-field equation predicts the
value of the power density at a distant
point given the power input to the antenna
and the gain of the antenna:
S  mW/cm (Eq. 11.1)
where
S is the power density in milliwatts per square centimeter
P G
4R2
TABLE 11.2 FCC Power Thresholds for
Routine Evaluation of Amateur Radio Stations
Wavelength band Transmitter power
(meters) (watts)
160 m 500
80 m 500
75 m 500
40 m 500
30 m 425
20 m 225
17 m 125
15 m 100
12 m 75
10 m 50
VHF (all bands) 50
UHF
70 cm 70
33 cm 150
23 cm 100
13cm 250
SHF (all bands) 250
EHF (al bands) 25
Note: This table covered in Part 97.13, shows the maximum RF
opersting power limit of an amateur radio station unless the
amateur operator performs a routine RF environmental evalua-
tion as specified by the FCC.
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 367
P is the input power to the antenna in watts
G is the antenna gain
R is the distance in centimeters
Stated in another way, “In the far field, as the distances from the
source increases, the power density is proportional to the inverse
square of the distance.”
The calculation of power density in the near field is complex due
to the particular antenna being used. Equation 11.1 will provide an
“overprediction” but could be used in a “worst-case” or conservative
prediction. Stated in terms of field strength, “In the near field, the field
strength depends on the type of antenna used.”
The W5YI RF Safety Tables, given in Appendix B, provide a conve-
nient and fast means for determining if your station is within the MPE
guidelines established by the FCC. These tables provide safe distances
from your antenna for both controlled and uncontrolled environments
in terms of frequency and power levels.
General RF safety recommendations
The material up to this point covers most of the RF safety questions in
the Technician Examination Pool in Appendix A. Some additional
items are provided to cover the remaining examination questions as
well as important aspects of RF safety guidelines.
ADDING A NEW ANTENNA TO AN EXISTING ANTENNA “FARM”
When a new antenna is added to a group of antennas, such as multiple
repeated antennas on top of a building, the new repeater signal must
be considered as part of the total radiation from the site when deter-
mining RF radiation exposure levels.
RF SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS FOR USING A HAND-HELD
TRANSCEIVER
You should make sure that the antenna is not held too close during
transmission. The antenna should be positioned away from your head
and away from others.
PRECAUTIONS FOR INSTALLING TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS
Highly directional antennas such as VHF and UHF Yagi beam anten-
nas should be installed in a location where no one can get close to
368 CHAPTER ELEVEN
them while you are transmitting. Any transmitting antenna, including
wire antennas, should be located so that no one can touch them while
you are transmitting. This touching may cause RF burns.
PRECAUTIONS FOR INSTALLING MOBILE ANTENNAS ON
VEHICLES
For the lowest RF radiation exposure to occupants inside the vehicle,
mobile antennas should be installed in the roof of the vehicle. When
this type of antenna is mounted on the metallic vehicle roof, the
mobile transceiver will generally produce less RF radiation exposure
than hand-held transceivers used inside the vehicle.
PRECAUTIONS FOR REMOVING THE SHIELDING COVER OF A UHF
AMPLIFIER
If the shielding cover of a UHF power amplifier is removed, make sure
the amplifier cannot be turned on. In general, all RF power amplifiers
should never be operated unless the covers are in place. This precau-
tion will help reduce the risk of shock from high voltages and reduce
RF radiation exposure.
Radio Communications Practices
Good communications practices for an amateur radio station include
the following related items: properly installed equipment and anten-
nas with adequate grounding, use of filters and shielding when
required to eliminate interference, proper use of test equipment,
proper tuning and adjustment of transmitters, protection against light-
ning, good safety practices, and good operating procedures. Note that
actions in one area might affect other areas. For example, safety is
directly related to all other areas.
You can develop good communications practices for your amateur
station only by diligent study and careful planning. A job well done
results in a sense of achievement and self-satisfaction.
Station installation
Planning an amateur station involves a variety of actions. By this time
you might have decided what type of equipment and antennas are best
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 369
suited for your needs. Now you have to find a space for the ham shack
and the antennas. To get started, develop an installation plan that
identifies the general layout and the required installation material. By
the time you receive your license, you will be ready to get on the air
with a minimum of effort.
Station layout
Select a location for the ham shack that will provide space for a com-
fortable operation position. A large table is ideal for locating the
receiver, transmitter, key, and other equipment you might have
decided upon. Be sure to leave plenty of room for operating the key,
writing traffic on a pad of paper, and storage of log books.
If you have to locate the ham station in a small space, you can
install a shelf over a small table to hold most of the equipment. Fig-
ure 11.2 shows a typical layout with the receiver located on the
Typical layout for a Novice radio station.
Key
Receiver
100-kHz frequency standard or
frequency counter
Transmitter SWR
meter 24-hour
clock
Coaxial cables
to antennas
Antenna
switch
F I G U R E 1 1 . 2
370 CHAPTER ELEVEN
table and the remaining equipment installed on the shelf. Because
most operation involves tuning the receiver, it is convenient to
have the receiver within easy reach. Many variations of this type of
installation can be developed to meet your particular needs. Some
amateurs have designed elaborate operating consoles for their ham
stations.
Keep in mind that personal safety is a major factor is designing the
station layout. This applies to the operator as well as any visitors to the
ham shack. Being able to lock the entrance to the ham shack is a good
idea, especially to keep out small children when you are away.
Station wiring
Make sure that you have adequate wiring to handle the required ac
power for the ham shack. All power lines should be properly fused to
protect against short circuits in the equipment. In addition, each piece
of equipment should be individually fused to prevent internal shorts
from causing a fire hazard or damage to the equipment. The use of
three-conductor power cords with a ground connection will help to
ensure safety in the ham shack.
It is a good idea to install all station wiring in hidden or concealed
locations to prevent physical contact with the wiring or possible dam-
age to the wiring. This also results in a neat and professional appear-
ance to your ham shack.
A station ground is a must for both personal safety and proper oper-
ation of the amateur equipment. Be sure that all equipment in the ham
shack is connected to a common ground with a heavy conductor such as
No. 10 or 12 AWG wire. A buried water pipe makes an excellent earth
ground. In the absence of a water pipe, drive a copper ground rod about
6 to 8 feet into the ground. If you have a tower installed next to the ham
shack, you can also use the ground rod to ground the tower as well as
the station equipment. Grounding wire, rods, and special connectors
can be obtained at a local electrical supply house, electronics parts sup-
plier, or hardware store.
One final recommendation—design your station wiring so that all
equipment can be disconnected from the ac power lines and antennas
with a minimum of effort. This helps to eliminate safety hazards or
unauthorized operation during your absence. In addition, this capabil-
ity offers excellent protection against lightning damage.
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 371
Radio-Frequency Interference (RFI)
Many radio amateurs are blamed for causing interference to nearby
radios, television sets, or audio systems. In some cases, the amateur’s
transmitter or transceiver can be radiating harmonic or spurious sig-
nals that interfere with the operation of these home-entertainment sys-
tems. However, studies to date have shown that most cases of
interference can be traced to design or construction deficiencies inher-
ent in these home-entertainment systems. For example, a television set
with poor selectivity in the tuner section can allow amateur signals to
enter the set and cause interference. Unfortunately, this type of situa-
tion does not relieve the amateur of some responsibility in trying to
help resolve the problem.
When confronted with a radio-frequency interference (RFI) com-
plaint, there are a number of actions that you can take to solve the
problem. If you are a newcomer to amateur radio with no experience
in RFI problems, you can often contact a local ham radio club for
advice and assistance. Almost every ham club has a “TVI committee”
that offers technical assistance in tracking down RFI problems by
checking your rig and the neighbor’s radio, TV set, or audio system. In
addition, most radio clubs are affiliated with the American Radio
Relay League, Newington, Connecticut 06111. This organization
maintains extensive information and technical expertise on amateur
matters such as RFI and provides this service upon request. The ARRL
Radio Amateur’s Handbook contains detailed information on RFI
problems and recommended solutions.
The first step in clearing up an RFI complaint is to check your
transmitter or transceiver for RFI emissions. For BCI or TVI problems,
you can check for interference with any available AM radio or TV set.
If you find evidence of interference radiations, take immediate action
to clear up the problem. If no interference exists, you might want to
demonstrate this finding to your neighbor.
Elimination of RFI
Most modern amateur transmitters and transceivers are designed to sup-
press harmonic or spurious radiation. However, improper adjustment of
the operating controls can result in RFI emissions. In other cases, poor
372 CHAPTER ELEVEN
grounds or lack of grounding can cause RFI problems. These types of
problems can be quickly cleared up with a minimum of effort.
Some older or home-built amateur transmitters can radiate harmonic
or spurious signals, thereby causing interference problems. Internal
modifications such as shielding the high-power stages or installing
bypass capacitors can clear up these problems. This type of effort
requires considerable patience and a technical expertise. An alternate
solution is to determine if a low-pass RF filter will eliminate the inter-
fering signals. A number of companies offer high-quality RF filters for
amateur operation. For example, the Barker & Williamson Company, 10
Canal Street, Bristol, PA 19007 [Telephone: (215) 788-5581], offers a com-
plete line of radio-frequency filters for the amateur station. The B&W
Series FL10 Low Pass TVI Filters for 160–10 meters and FL6 Filters for 6
meters are available in either 100 or 1000 watt power capacity ratings.
Most of these filters are designed for 52-ohm transmission lines; how-
ever, the FL10/1500/70 works with 72-ohm transmission lines. Figure
11.3 shows how these filters can be installed.
Sometimes a TVI problem can be cleared up by installing a high-
pass RF filter at the antenna terminals of the TV set. This type of filter
allows the higher frequency TV signals to pass unattenuated into the
TV set while rejecting the lower frequency amateur signals. The Radio
Shack TV Interference Filter, Catalog No. 15-582, is typical of these
types of filters.
In general, interference to audio systems can only be corrected by
installing filter devices on the audio equipment. In some cases, the
interconnecting audio cables, particularly long unshielded speaker
wires, act as antennas. As such, the audio or hi-fi system simply oper-
ates as an untuned shortwave receiver, picking up any strong radiated
signals in the vicinity. Some manufacturers of these systems will pro-
A low-pass RF filter installed in the transmission line at the transmitter or transceiver end.
Transmitter
or
transceiver
Low-pass
RF
filter
Coaxial cable
to antenna
F I G U R E 1 1 . 3
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 373
vide modification kits to correct this type of problem. Installation of
RF bypass capacitors (about 0.001 μF) on input and output terminals
will usually clear up this type of interference. In some cases, the
speaker wires might require shielding with the shield connected to the
equipment ground.
How to Use Test Equipment
An important part of amateur radio is knowing when and how to use
test equipment. Technical manuals furnished with amateur radio
equipment usually include dc operating voltage and resistance mea-
surements. This information is helpful in locating defective compo-
nents or in making adjustments for proper operation. With simple test
equipment such as voltmeters or ohmmeters, you can quickly learn to
isolate defective components and repair your ham rigs.
This discussion of test equipment concentrates on the four basic
instruments: the ammeter, voltmeter, ohmmeter, and wattmeter. The
FCC expects you to be familiar with these basic instruments for both
the Technician examination and subsequent operation of your ham
station. As you progress in your career of amateur radio, you will come
into contact with more complex forms of test equipment, such as sig-
nal generators, frequency counters, and oscilloscopes. By developing a
good knowledge of the four basic test instruments listed above, you
will be prepared to understand and use the more advanced types of
test equipment. Many amateur publications contain descriptions of
this test equipment and how to use it.
Meter movements
The D’Arsonval meter movement is used in virtually all test equip-
ment employing meters. This meter movement consists of a horse-
shoe-shaped magnet with a moving coil placed between the open ends
of the magnet. A pointer and spring is attached to the moving coil to
establish a zero reference point. When a dc current flows through the
coil, the magnetic field produced by this current interacts with the
fixed magnetic field produced by the magnet. This causes the moving
coil to rotate, and the amount of rotation is proportional to the current
flowing in the coil. Thus the D’Arsonval meter movement is used to
measure the amount of current flow. In the proper type of circuit, the
374 CHAPTER ELEVEN
meter movement can be calibrated in
terms of amperes, volts, watts, or even gal-
lons of gasoline in an automobile gas tank.
Ammeters
The ammeter in its simplest form is a cur-
rent meter. When connected in series with
an electrical circuit, it allows you to mea-
sure the current flowing in the circuit. Fig-
ure 11.4 shows how the ammeter is
connected in a circuit. Note that the circuit
must be broken and the ammeter connected in series to form a completed
electrical path. As connected, the ammeter measures current flowing in
the collector circuit through Q12, R22, and R23. Never connect an
ammeter across a source of voltage or potential difference, such as a bat-
tery or resistor. This can damage or burn out the ammeter.
Ammeters are available in many types, sizes, and current ranges.
Typical dc ammeters used with amateur equipment include current
ranges of 0–50 μA, 0–1 mA, 0–200 mA, and 0–1 ampere. Most ac amme-
ters are rated in terms of frequency response or frequency of operation.
For example, a 0–100-mA ac ammeter designed for 60-Hz power line
measurements cannot be used to measure current at RF frequencies.
Voltmeters
Voltmeters are used to measure voltage or potential differences in elec-
trical circuits. Unlike the ammeter, the voltmeter must be placed
across the component or source of voltage to make the required mea-
surement. Voltage measurements are illustrated in Fig. 11.5.
Using an ammeter to measure current in a closed
circuit.
Q12
npn
transistor
R23
R22
Break circuit
at this point
V CC


F I G U R E 1 1 . 4
Voltage measurements in a pnp transistor circuit.
Q5
pnp
transistor
Voltmeter connected
at this point
measures voltage
across R6.
V
R7
R6
V Voltmeter connected at this point
measures voltage across R7.
Voltmeter connected
across battery measures
the battery voltage.
VCC

 V

F I G U R E 1 1 . 5
A simple dc voltmeter consists of a dc
ammeter in series with a resistor, as shown
in Fig. 11.7. The sensitivity of the meter
(current range) and the value of the series
resistor determine the range of voltage that
can be measured. For operation as a volt-
meter, the meter scale is calibrated in volts
instead of current.
The value of the series resistor for a
given voltage range can be calculated as
follows:
R  (Eq. 11.2)
where
R is the resistance of the series resistor in ohms
VR is the desired voltage range of the voltmeter in volts
IM is the ammeter sensitivity in amperes
Ohmmeters
As the name implies, an ohmmeter measures ohms or resistance. Fig-
ure 11.8 illustrates resistance measurements in an electrical circuit.
VR
IM
The Icom IC-207H Dual Band FM Mobile Transceiver. The IC-207H provides dual band coverage of the
2–meter and 440-cm amateur bands for FM operation. A “receive only” capability for 118–174 MHz AM is
also provided. The mobile transceiver output power is 5–50 watts for VHF and 5–35 watts for UHF opera-
tion. The many operating features include FM repeater operation and 9600 bps (bits per second) packet
radio with direct connections to an external packet modem.
F I G U R E 1 1 . 6
A simple 0–100 Vdc voltmeter circuit using a 0–1 mA
meter.
R
100K
A

Q-1 mA
ammeter

Test probes
F I G U R E 1 1 . 7
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 375
376 CHAPTER ELEVEN
When making resistance measurements,
the following conditions should be
observed:
 Always turn off the power when mea-
suring the resistance of a component
wired into a circuit. Any voltage
applied across an ohmmeter can dam-
age the instrument. Also, the resistance
measurement will probably be in error
because an external voltage will affect
the operation of the ohmmeter.
 It might be necessary to remove a component from a circuit
before measuring its resistance. Other components in parallel
with it might lower the resistance “seen” by the ohmmeter. In
most cases, you can simply disconnect one side of the compo-
nent and take the resistance reading.
 Semiconductor devices such as diodes and transistors will show a
greater resistance in one direction than in the opposite direction.
Therefore, by reversing the leads of the ohmmeter, you can often
determine if the device is defective.
In its simplest form, the ohmmeter consists of an ammeter in series
with a resistor and a battery. Figure 11.9 shows a simple ohmmeter. With
Typical use of an ohmmeter.
Break circuit at these points
before measurements are taken Ohm
Ohm OhmV
D6
R12 R13
F I G U R E 1 1 . 8
A simple ohmmeter circuit.
1450 100
Test probes
A


O–1 mA
ammeter
Zero adjust
control
1.5 V
Resistor being
checked for
resistance
F I G U R E 1 1 . 9
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 377
a short circuit connected across the test probes, the zero adjust control is
adjusted for a full-scale reading on the ammeter. Thus, when a resistance
is connected across the test probes, the ammeter reading will correspond
to a known value of resistance. If the ammeter scale is calibrated in ohms,
the value of the unknown resistor can be read directly.
The multimeter
One of the most versatile pieces of test equipment, the multitester (or
multimeter) can be used to measure voltages, current, resistance, and
in some instances, other electrical quantities. For example, the Radio
Shack Model 22-220 10-megohm FET-Input Multitester in Figure
11.10A can be used to measure dc and ac voltage levels to 1000 volts
in seven ranges with a 10-megohm input resistance. This multitester,
also known as a volt-ohmmeter, measures dc current up to 10 amperes,
resistance up to 100 megohms, and five ranges of decibels from –20 to
+62 dB voltage levels.
A more recent form of multitester, the digital multimeter, is rapidly
becoming a popular test instrument. The Radio Shack Model 22-174
Handheld True RMS Autoranging/Manual LCD Digital Multimeter,
shown in Figure 11.10B is an example of this new generation of multi-
testers. This test instrument measures dc and ac voltages, dc and ac cur-
rent, frequency up to 4 MHz, dBm levels, capacitance from 4 nF to 400
F, transistor gain, audible continuity buzzer, and even a temperature
probe with C/F scales.
Wattmeters
Wattmeters are used to measure power delivered to a load. Amateurs use
RF wattmeters to measure the RF power delivered from a transmitter to
the transmission line. Some RF wattmeters contain an SWR (standing-
wave ratio) meter for measuring both forward and reflected power. Figure
8.15 in Chap. 8 shows a typical RF wattmeter suitable for amateur use.
Operating Procedures
Finally, after passing the Technician examination and completing the
installation of your amateur station, you are ready to begin operation. But
first, you need to learn the basic principles of good operating procedures
for successful and rewarding operation of that new ham rig. To avoid mass
378 CHAPTER ELEVEN
confusion on the amateur bands, all hams use a common and efficient set of
operating procedures that have been developed over the years. Each FCC
Technician examination includes several questions covering this subject.
Operating courtesy
Before attempting to establish a QSO (communication) with another
amateur, be sure you have tuned the transmitter for proper operation.
Analog and digital multimeters. These versatile test instruments provide an accurate means for measuring
electrical qualities associated with amateur radio equipment as well as virtually all other types of electrical
and electronic devices and equipment. (A) Radio Shack Model 22-220 Multitester employing a sensitive meter
movement for measuring a wide range of voltage, current, and resistance. (B) Radio Shack Model 22-174 Hand-
held True RMS Autoranging/Manual LCD Digital Multimeter. This digital multimeter is capable of precise mea-
surements of voltage, current, resistance, frequency, capacitance and temperature. Tandy/Radio Shack
F I G U R E 1 1 . 1 0
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 379
To avoid excessive tune-up time on the air (you might cause interfer-
ence to an ongoing communication) use a dummy load for initial tune-
up procedures. Check for activity on the desired frequency before
tuning up the transmitter on-the-air. If necessary, shift up or down a
few kHz to avoid causing interference to other hams.
In any communication with another amateur radio station, always zero
beat your signal with the incoming signal from the other station. This
ensures a more reliable contact; equally important, you and the other ama-
teur radio station will be occupying less frequency spectrum. In today’s
crowded bands, this can make a difference in a successful contact.
Before sending out your first CQ, listen on the desired operating fre-
quency to determine if it is already in use. If you attempt to use a fre-
quency with a QSO in progress, the odds are that you are wasting your
time as well as interfering with the other parties in communication.
Remember, you have to share the amateur bands with many other hams.
Sometimes it is better to listen for someone calling CQ. Using this
approach, you avoid interference to other hams and gain valuable expe-
rience in how to establish contacts. With a few QSOs under your belt,
you will feel more confident in calling CQ.
One last item in operating courtesy—don’t try to show off your code
proficiency by sending too fast. If you want to make solid contacts, send
your transmissions at a rate that can be copied by the distant ham. If he
or she is transmitting at a rate too fast for good copy, send a QRS on your
next transmission. This tells the person to slow down.
CW or telegraph procedures
Hams use an abbreviated language for CW operation to expedite com-
munications. This universal language allows you to communicate
with other hams regardless of country or nationality.
There are three parts to this language: Q signals that state or request
specific information; the RST signal reporting system for exchanging
information on signal quality; and standard abbreviations. With a little
effort, you can quickly learn enough of this new language to pass the
Technician examination. After a few months of operating experience,
you will pick up the remaining parts.
Q signals
Q signals are always sent as a group of three letters that begin with the let-
ter Q. Each Q signal has a particular meaning that is recognized by hams
380 CHAPTER ELEVEN
across the world. For example, QRN means “I am being troubled by sta-
tic.” If the Q signal is followed by a question mark (?), it is a query to the
distant operator. QRN? asks “Are you being troubled by static?”
Table 11.3 lists most of the more common Q signals used in ama-
teur radio communications and in the FCC Technician examination. A
complete listing of all international Q signals as well as other operat-
ing aids can be found in the ARRL Handbook For Radio Amateurs.
The RST signal-reporting system
Amateurs use this signal-reporting system to describe the signal read-
ability, strength, and tone characteristics of the received signal. In many
instances, you will want to know how your signal is being received by a
distant ham. By sending only three numbers, he or she can give you a
complete signal report. The RST system is given in Table 11.4.
Prosigns and standard abbreviations
The final part of this new and exciting language used by CW operators is
that of prosigns (procedural signs) and standard abbreviations. Most of
these CW terms, required by regulations, help you to minimize the key-
ing required to communicate with distant hams. Table 11.5 lists the more
common prosigns and standard abbreviations you should know for the
FCC examination and subsequent operation on the ham bands. The lines
above the prosigns mean that there is no spacing between the characters.
A Typical Contact on the Novice Bands
The following series of messages illustrate how you can use CW trans-
missions to converse with other hams. In actual CW communications
you would probably stay on the air for a much longer period of time,
exchanging much information with the other operator. Also, you
might want to use more or fewer abbreviations with longer or shorter
sentences. Refer to Tables 11.3, 11.4, and 11.5 to determine the full
meaning of this short series of messages.
Your initial transmission:
CQ CQ CQ DE WC4HOI WC4HOI WC4HOI K
The first reply:
WC4HOI DE WD6LZZ R K
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 381
TABLE 11.3 Some of the More Common Q Signals Used in Amateur Radio
Q
signal Meaning as statement Meaning as question
QRM I am experiencing interference. Are you experiencing interference?
QRN I am troubled with Are you being troubled with
atmospherics and static. atmospherics and static?
QRP I am reducing power. (Alternate meanings: Shall I reduce power?
I am transmitting on low power or Please
reduce power.)
QRS Please send slower.(You are sending too fast, Shall I send slower?
I am having trouble copying you.)
QRT I am going to stop sending. Are you going to stop sending?
QRX Wait (standby), I will call again at (time) When will you call again?
(Or: Please call me if convenient.)
QRZ You are being called by (a third station) Who is calling me?
QSA Your signal strength is ___________. What is my signal strength?
(A scale of 1 to 5:
1 - Barely perceptible
2 - Weak
3 - Fair
4 - Good
5 - Excellent)
QSB Your signals are fading. Are my signals fading?
QSL I (will) acknowledge receipt (or I will send Please acknowledge receipt (or Please send
you a QSL card acknowledging this contact). me a QSL card acknowledging this contact).
QSO I can communicate with ________ directly. Can you communicate with _______ directly?
QSY I am changing operating frequency Are you going to change operating
to _______ kHz. frequency (or Can you change
operating frequency to _______ kHz?).
QTH My location is _______. What is your location _______?
382 CHAPTER ELEVEN
TABLE 11.4 The RST Signal Reporting System
Readability
1 - Unreadable
2 - Barely readable, some words understandable
3 - Readable with considerable difficulty
4 - Readable with practically no difficulty
5 - Perfectly readable
Signal strength
1 - Faint signals, barely perceptible
2 - Very weak signals
3 - Weak signals
4 - Fair signals
5 - Fairly good signals
6 - Good signals
7 - Moderately strong signals
8 - Strong signals
9 - Extremely strong signals
Tone
1 - Sixty cycle ac hum or less, very rough or broad
2 - Very rough ac, very harsh and broad
3 - Rough ac tone, rectified but not filtered
4 - Rough note, some trace of filtering
5 - Filtered rectified ac but strongly ripple modulated
6 - Filtered tone, definite trace of ripple modulation
7 - Near pure tone, trace of modulation
8 - Near perfect tone, trace of modulation
9 - Perfect tone, no trace of ripple or modulation of any kind (Add an X for crys-
tal-clear tones)
RF RADIATION SAFETY AND RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 383
TABLE 11.5 Prosigns and Standard Abbreviations Used in Amateur Radio.
Prosign Meaning
AR End of transmission
AS Standby (or “Wait until I call you”)
BK Break (or “Please allow me to break into this conversation”)
BT Separation between address and message text, and between message
text and signature
CQ General call to any station
DE From (or “This is _______ ”)
K Go ahead
R Roger (or affirmative)
SK Out (or end of communication and no more communications expected)
V Test (on-the-air test signal) Normally a series of Vs followed by the
operator’s call sign.
Popular abbreviations used by many amateurs
CUL See you later
DX Distant or far-away station
GA Go ahead
GM Good morning
OM Old man
Rig Ham equipment, normally the transmitter or transceiver
TNX Thanks
UR Your
WX Weather
YL Your lady
XYL Wife
73 Best regards
88 Love and kisses
384 CHAPTER ELEVEN
Your second transmission:
QRZ? QRZ? WD6? DE WC4HOI AR K
The second reply:
WC4HOI DE WD6LZZ WD6LZZ WD6LZZ AR K
Your third transmission:
WD6LZZ DE WC4HOI R UR CALL BT HAVE QRN HERE. NAME IS
CHARLIE. QSA? UR SIG 5-7-9. QTH IS WINSTON SALEM, NC. PLS
GIVE UR NAME AND
QTH? BT WD6LZZ DE WC4HOI AR K
The third reply:
WC4HOI DE WD6LZZ R BT NAME IS JAMES. QTH IS LOS ANGE-
LES, CA. UR
SIG 5-9-9. MANY TNX FOR QSO. HAVE TO LEAVE FOR SCHOOL.
CUL OM BT
WC4HOI DE WD6LZZ SK K
Your final transmission:
WD6LZZ DE WC4HOI R BT TNX FOR QSO. HOPE TO HEAR U ON
TOMOR-
ROW AT SAME TIME. CUL BT WD6LZZ DE WC4HOI SK
Subelement T1: Commission’s Rules (9 Exam
Questions—9 Groups)
T1A Basis and purpose of amateur service and definitions; Sta-
tion/Operator license; classes of US amateur licenses, including basic
differences; privileges of the various license classes; term of licenses;
grace periods; modifications of licenses; current mailing address on
file with FCC
T1A01 Who makes and enforces the rules and regulations of the
amateur service in the US?
A. The Congress of the United States
B. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
C. The Volunteer Examiner Coordinators (VECs)
D. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
Element 2—Technician Class
Examination Question Pool*
A
385
A P P E N D I X
*As released by the Question Pool Committee National Conference of Volunteer Exam-
iner Coordinators February 1, 2000
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
386 APPENDIX A
T1A02 What are two of the five purposes for the amateur service?
A. To protect historical radio data, and help the public understand
radio history
B. To help foreign countries improve communication and technical
skills, and encourage visits from foreign hams
C. To modernize radio schematic drawings, and increase the pool of
electrical drafting people
D. To increase the number of trained radio operators and electronics
experts, and improve international goodwill
T1A03 What is the definition of an amateur station?
A. A station in a public radio service used for radiocommunications
B. A station using radiocommunications for a commercial purpose
C. A station using equipment for training new broadcast operators and
technicians
D. A station in the Amateur Radio service used for radiocommuni-
cations
T1A04 What is the definition of a control operator of an amateur station?
A. Anyone who operates the controls of the station
B. Anyone who is responsible for the station’s equipment
C. Any licensed amateur operator who is responsible for the station’s
transmissions
D. The amateur operator with the highest class of license who is near
the controls of the station
T1A05 Which of the following is required before you can operate an
amateur station in the US?
A. You must hold an FCC operator’s training permit for a licensed
radio station
B. You must submit an FCC Form 605 together with a license exami-
nation fee
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 387
C. The FCC must grant you an amateur operator/primary station
license
D. The FCC must issue you a Certificate of Successful Completion of
Amateur Training
T1A06 What must happen before you are allowed to operate an
amateur station?
A. The FCC database must show that you have been granted an amateur
license
B. You must have written authorization from the FCC
C. You must have written authorization from a Volunteer Examiner
Coordinator
D. You must have a copy of the FCC Rules, Part 97, at your station
location
T1A07 What are the US amateur operator licenses that a new amateur
might earn?
A. Novice, Technician, General, Advanced
B. Technician, Technician Plus, General, Advanced
C. Novice, Technician, General, Advanced
D. Technician, Technician with Morse code, General, Amateur Extra
T1A08 How soon after you pass the elements required for your first
Amateur Radio license may you transmit?
A. Immediately
B. 30 days after the test date
C. As soon as the FCC grants you a license
D. As soon as you receive your license from the FCC
T1A09 How soon before the expiration date of your license should
you send the FCC a completed Form 605 or file with the Universal
Licensing System on the World Wide Web for a renewal?
388 APPENDIX A
A. No more than 90 days
B. No more than 30 days
C. Within 6 to 9 months
D. Within 6 months to a year
T1A10 What is the normal term for which a new amateur station
license is granted?
A. 5 years
B. 7 years
C. 10 years
D. For the lifetime of the licensee
T1A11 What is the “grace period” during which the FCC will renew
an expired 10-year license?
A. 2 years
B. 5 years
C. 10 years
D. There is no grace period
T1A12 What is one way you may notify the FCC if your mailing
address changes?
A. Fill out an FCC Form 605 using your new address, attach a copy of
your license, and mail it to your local FCC Field Office
B. Fill out an FCC Form 605 using your new address, attach a copy of
your license, and mail it to the FCC office in Gettysburg, PA
C. Call your local FCC Field Office and give them your new address
over the phone or e-mail this information to the local Field Office
D. Call the FCC office in Gettysburg, PA, and give them your new
address over the phone or e-mail this information the FCC
T1B Frequency privileges authorized to the Technician control oper-
ator (VHF/UHF and HF)
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 389
T1B01 What are the frequency limits of the 6-meter band in ITU
Region 2?
A. 52.0–54.5 MHz
B. 50.0–54.0 MHz
C. 50.1–52.1 MHz
D. 50.0–56.0 MHz
T1B02 What are the frequency limits of the 2-meter band in ITU
Region 2?
A. 145.0–150.5 MHz
B. 144.0–148.0 MHz
C. 144.1–146.5 MHz
D. 144.0–146.0 MHz
T1B03 What are the frequency limits of the 1.25-meter band in ITU
Region 2?
A. 225.0–230.5 MHz
B. 222.0–225.0 MHz
C. 224.1–225.1 MHz
D. 220.0–226.0 MHz
T1B04 What are the frequency limits of the 70-centimeter band in
ITU Region 2?
A. 430.0–440.0 MHz
B. 430.0–450.0 MHz
C. 420.0–450.0 MHz
D. 432.0–435.0 MHz
T1B05 What are the frequency limits of the 33-centimeter band in
ITU Region 2?
390 APPENDIX A
A. 903–927 MHz
B. 05–925 MHz
C. 900–930 MHz
D. 902–928 MHz
T1B06 What are the frequency limits of the 23-centimeter band?
A. 1260–1270 MHz
B. 1240–1300 MHz
C. 1270–1295 MHz
D. 1240–1246 MHz
T1B07 What are the frequency limits of the 13-centimeter band in
ITU Region 2?
A. 2300–2310 MHz and 2390–2450 MHz
B. 2300–2350 MHz and 2400–2450 MHz
C. 2350–2380 MHz and 2390–2450 MHz
D. 2300–2350 MHz and 2380–2450 MHz
T1B08 What are the frequency limits of the 80-meter band for Tech-
nician class licensees who have passed a Morse code exam?
A. 3500–4000 kHz
B. 3675–3725 kHz
C. 7100–7150 kHz
D. 7000–7300 kHz
T1B09 What are the frequency limits of the 40-meter band in ITU
Region 2 for Technician class licensees who have passed a Morse code
exam?
A. 3500–4000 kHz
B. 3700–3750 kHz
C. 7100–7150 kHz
D. 7000–7300 kHz
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 391
T1B10 What are the frequency limits of the 15-meter band for Tech-
nician class licensees who have passed a Morse code exam?
A. 21.100–21.200 MHz
B. 21.000–21.450 MHz
C. 28.000–29.700 MHz
D. 28.100–28.200 MHz
T1B11 What are the frequency limits of the 10-meter band for Tech-
nician class licensees who have passed a Morse code exam?
A. 28.000–28.500 MHz
B. 28.100–29.500 MHz
C. 28.100–28.500 MHz
D. 29.100–29.500 MHz
T1B12 If you are a Technician licensee who has passed a Morse code
exam, what is one document you can use to prove that you are autho-
rized to use certain amateur frequencies below 30 MHz?
A. A certificate from the FCC showing that you have notified them
that you will be using the HF bands
B. A certificate showing that you have attended a class in HF commu-
nications
C. A Certificate of Successful Completion of Examination showing
that you have passed a Morse code exam
D. No special proof is required
T1C Emission privileges authorized to the Technician control opera-
tor (VHF/UHF and HF)
T1C01 On what HF band may a Technician licensee use FM phone
emission?
A. 10 meters
B. 15 meters
C. 75 meters
D. None
392 APPENDIX A
T1C02 On what frequencies within the 6-meter band may phone
emissions be transmitted?
A. 50.0–54.0 MHz only
B. 50.1–54.0 MHz only
C. 51.0–54.0 MHz only
D. 52.0–54.0 MHz only
T1C03 On what frequencies within the 2-meter band may image
emissions be transmitted?
A. 144.1–148.0 MHz only
B. 146.0–148.0 MHz only
C. 144.0–148.0 MHz only
D. 146.0–147.0 MHz only
T1C04 What frequencies within the 2-meter band are reserved exclu-
sively for CW operations?
A. 146–147 MHz
B. 146.0–146.1 MHz
C. 145–148 MHz
D. 144.0–144.1 MHz
T1C05 What emission types are Technician control operators who
have passed a Morse code exam allowed to use in the 80-meter
band?
A. CW only
B. Data only
C. RTTY only
D. Phone only
T1C06 What emission types are Technician control operators who
have passed a Morse code exam allowed to use from 7100 to 7150 kHz
in ITU Region 2?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 393
A. CW and data
B. Phone
C. Data only
D. CW only
T1C07 What emission types are Technician control operators who
have passed a Morse code exam allowed to use on frequencies from
28.1 to 28.3 MHz?
A. All authorized amateur emission privileges
B. Data or phone
C. CW, RTTY and data
D. CW and phone
T1C08 What emission types are Technician control operators who
have passed a Morse code exam allowed to use on frequencies from
28.3 to 28.5 MHz?
A. All authorized amateur emission privileges
B. CW and data
C. CW and single-sideband phone
D. Data and phone
T1C09 What emission types are Technician control operators
allowed to use on the amateur 1.25-meter band in ITU Region 2?
A. Only CW and phone
B. Only CW and data
C. Only data and phone
D. All amateur emission privileges authorized for use on the band
T1C10 What emission types are Technician control operators
allowed to use on the amateur 23-centimeter band?
A. Only data and phone
B. Only CW and data
394 APPENDIX A
C. Only CW and phone
D. All amateur emission privileges authorized for use on the band
T1C11 On what frequencies within the 70-centimeter band in ITU
Region 2 may image emissions be transmitted?
A. 420.0–420.1 MHz only
B. 430.0–440.0 MHz only
C. 420.0–450.0 MHz only
D. 440.0–450.0 MHz only
T1D Responsibility of licensee; station control; control operator
requirements; station identification; points of communication and
operation; business communications
T1D01 What is the control point of an amateur station?
A. The on/off switch of the transmitter
B. The input/output port of a packet controller
C. The variable frequency oscillator of a transmitter
D. The location at which the control operator function is performed
T1D02 Who is responsible for the proper operation of an amateur
station?
A. Only the control operator
B. Only the station licensee
C. Both the control operator and the station licensee
D. The person who owns the station equipment
T1D03 What is your responsibility as a station licensee?
A. You must allow another amateur to operate your station upon
request
B. You must be present whenever the station is operated
C. You must notify the FCC if another amateur acts as the control
operator
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 395
D. You are responsible for the proper operation of the station in accor-
dance with the FCC rules
T1D04 Who may be the control operator of an amateur station?
A. Any person over 21 years of age
B. Any person over 21 years of age with a General class license or
higher
C. Any licensed amateur chosen by the station licensee
D. Any licensed amateur with a Technician class license or higher
T1D05 If you are the control operator at the station of another ama-
teur who has a higher class license than yours, what operating privi-
leges are you allowed?
A. Any privileges allowed by the higher license
B. Only the privileges allowed by your license
C. All the emission privileges of the higher license, but only the fre-
quency privileges of your license
D. All the frequency privileges of the higher license, but only the
emission privileges of your license
T1D06 When an amateur station is transmitting, where must its con-
trol operator be?
A. At the station’s control point
B. Anywhere in the same building as the transmitter
C. At the station’s entrance, to control entry to the room
D. Anywhere within 50 km of the station location
T1D07 How often must an amateur station be identified?
A. At the beginning of a contact and at least every ten minutes after that
B. At least once during each transmission
C. At least every 10 minutes during and at the end of a contact
D. At the beginning and end of each transmission
396 APPENDIX A
T1D08 What identification, if any, is required when two amateur sta-
tions begin communications?
A. No identification is required
B. One of the stations must give both stations’ call signs
C. Each station must transmit its own call sign
D. Both stations must transmit both call signs
T1D09 What identification, if any, is required when two amateur sta-
tions end communications?
A. No identification is required
B. One of the stations must transmit both stations’ call signs
C. Each station must transmit its own call sign
D. Both stations must transmit both call signs
T1D10 What is the longest period of time an amateur station can
operate without transmitting its call sign?
A. 5 minutes
B. 10 minutes
C. 15 minutes
D. 30 minutes
T1D11 What emission type may always be used for station identifi-
cation, regardless of the transmitting frequency?
A. CW
B. RTTY
C. MCW
D. Phone
T1D12 If you are a Technician licensee with a Certificate of Successful
Completion of Examination (CSCE) for a Morse code exam, how should
you identify your station when transmitting on the 10-meter band?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 397
A. You must give your call sign followed by the words “plus plus”
B. You must give your call sign followed by the words “temporary
plus”
C. No special form of identification is needed
D. You must give your call sign and the location of the VE examina-
tion where you obtained the CSCE
T1E Third-party communication; authorized and prohibited trans-
missions; permissible one-way communication
T1E01 What kind of payment is allowed for third-party messages
sent by an amateur station?
A. Any amount agreed upon in advance
B. Donation of repairs to amateur equipment
C. Donation of amateur equipment
D. No payment of any kind is allowed
T1E02 What is the definition of third-party communications?
A. A message sent between two amateur stations for someone else
B. Public service communications for a political party
C. Any messages sent by amateur stations
D. A three-minute transmission to another amateur
T1E03 What is a “third party” in amateur communications?
A. An amateur station that breaks in to talk
B. A person who is sent a message by amateur communications other
than a control operator who handles the message
C. A shortwave listener who monitors amateur communications
D. An unlicensed control operator
T1E04 When are third-party messages allowed to be sent to a foreign
country?
398 APPENDIX A
A. When sent by agreement of both control operators
B. When the third party speaks to a relative
C. They are not allowed under any circumstances
D. When the US has a third-party agreement with the foreign country
or the third party is qualified to be a control operator
T1E05 If you let an unlicensed third party use your amateur station,
what must you do at your station’s control point?
A. You must continuously monitor and supervise the third-party’s
participation
B. You must monitor and supervise the communication only if con-
tacts are made in countries that have no third-party communica-
tions agreement with the United States
C. You must monitor and supervise the communication only if con-
tacts are made on frequencies below 30 MHz
D. You must key the transmitter and make the station identification
T1E06 Besides normal identification, what else must a U.S. station
do when sending third-party communications internationally?
A. The U.S. station must transmit its own call sign at the beginning of
each communication, and at least every ten minutes after that
B. The U.S. station must transmit both call signs at the end of each
communication
C. The U.S. station must transmit its own call sign at the beginning of
each communication, and at least every five minutes after that
D. Each station must transmit its own call sign at the end of each
transmission, and at least every five minutes after that
T1E07 When is an amateur allowed to broadcast information to the
general public?
A. Never
B. Only when the operator is being paid
C. Only when broadcasts last less than 1 hour
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 399
D. Only when broadcasts last longer than 15 minutes
T1E08 When is an amateur station permitted to transmit music?
A. Never, except incidental music during authorized rebroadcasts of
space shuttle communications
B. Only if the transmitted music produces no spurious emissions
C. Only if it is used to jam an illegal transmission
D. Only if it is above 1280 MHz, and the music is a live performance
T1E09 When is the use of codes or ciphers allowed to hide the mean-
ing of an amateur message?
A. Only during contests
B. Only during nationally declared emergencies
C. Never, except when special requirements are met
D. Only on frequencies above 1280 MHz
T1E10 Which of the following one-way communications may not be
transmitted in the amateur service?
A. Telecommands to model craft
B. Broadcasts intended for the general public
C. Brief transmissions to make adjustments to the station
D. Morse code practice
T1E11 If you are allowing a non-amateur friend to use your station to
talk to someone in the US, and a foreign station breaks in to talk to
your friend, what should you do?
A. Have your friend wait until you find out if the US has a third-party
agreement with the foreign station’s government
B. Stop all discussions and quickly sign off
C. Since you can talk to any foreign amateurs, your friend may keep
talking as long as you are the control operator
D. Report the incident to the foreign amateur’s government
400 APPENDIX A
T1E12 When are you allowed to transmit a message to a station in a
foreign country for a third party?
A. Anytime
B. Never
C. Anytime, unless there is a third-party agreement between the US
and the foreign government
D. If there is a third-party agreement with the US government, or if the
third party is eligible to be the control operator
T1F Frequency selection and sharing; transmitter power; digital
communications
T1F01 If the FCC rules say that the amateur service is a secondary
user of a frequency band, and another service is a primary user, what
does this mean?
A. Nothing special; all users of a frequency band have equal rights to
operate
B. Amateurs are only allowed to use the frequency band during emer-
gencies
C. Amateurs are allowed to use the frequency band only if they do not
cause harmful interference to primary users
D. Amateurs must increase transmitter power to overcome any inter-
ference caused by primary users
T1F02 What rule applies if two amateur stations want to use the
same frequency?
A. The station operator with a lesser class of license must yield the fre-
quency to a higher-class licensee
B. The station operator with a lower power output must yield the fre-
quency to the station with a higher power output
C. Both station operators have an equal right to operate on the fre-
quency
D. Station operators in ITU Regions 1 and 3 must yield the frequency
to stations in ITU Region 2
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 401
T1F03 If a repeater is causing harmful interference to another
repeater and a frequency coordinator has recommended the operation
of one repeater only, who is responsible for resolving the interference?
A. The licensee of the unrecommended repeater
B. Both repeater licensees
C. The licensee of the recommended repeater
D. The frequency coordinator
T1F04 If a repeater is causing harmful interference to another ama-
teur repeater and a frequency coordinator has recommended the oper-
ation of both repeaters, who is responsible for resolving the
interference?
A. The licensee of the repeater that has been recommended for the
longest period of time
B. The licensee of the repeater that has been recommended the most
recently
C. The frequency coordinator
D. Both repeater licensees
T1F05 What is the term for the average power supplied to an antenna
transmission line during one RF cycle at the crest of the modulation
envelope?
A. Peak transmitter power
B. Peak output power
C. Average radio-frequency power
D. Peak envelope power
T1F06 What is the maximum transmitting power permitted an ama-
teur station on 146.52 MHz?
A. 200 watts pep output
B. 500 watts ERP
C. 1000 watts dc input
D. 1500 watts pep output
402 APPENDIX A
T1F07 On which band(s) may a Technician licensee who has passed
a Morse code exam use up to 200 watts pep output power?
A. 80, 40, 15, and 10 meters
B. 80, 40, 20, and 10 meters
C. 1.25 meters
D. 23 centimeters
T1F08 What amount of transmitter power must amateur stations use
at all times?
A. 25 watts pep output
B. 250 watts pep output
C. 1500 watts pep output
D. The minimum legal power necessary to communicate
T1F09 What name does the FCC use for telemetry, telecommand or
computer communications emissions?
A. CW
B. Image
C. Data
D. RTTY
T1F10 What name does the FCC use for narrow-band direct-printing
telegraphy emissions?
A. CW
B. Image
C. MCW
D. RTTY
T1F11 What is the maximum symbol rate permitted for packet trans-
missions on the 2-meter band?
A. 300 bauds
B. 1200 bauds
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 403
C. 19.6 kilobauds
D. 56 kilobauds
T1F12 What is the maximum symbol rate permitted for RTTY or data
transmissions on the 6- and 2-meter bands?
A. 56 kilobauds
B. 19.6 kilobauds
C. 1200 bauds
D. 300 bauds
T1G Satellite and space communications; false signals or unidenti-
fied communications; malicious interference
T1G01 What is an amateur space station?
A. An amateur station operated on an unused frequency
B. An amateur station awaiting its new call letters from the FCC
C. An amateur station located more than 50 kilometers above the
Earth’s surface
D. An amateur station that communicates with the International
Space Station
T1G02 Who may be the licensee of an amateur space station?
A. An amateur holding an Amateur Extra class operator license
B. Any licensed amateur operator
C. Anyone designated by the commander of the spacecraft
D. No one unless specifically authorized by the government
T1G03 Which band may NOT be used by Earth stations for satellite
communications?
A. 6 meters
B. 2 meters
C. 70 centimeters
D. 23 centimeters
404 APPENDIX A
T1G04 When may false or deceptive amateur signals or communica-
tions be transmitted?
A. Never
B. When operating a beacon transmitter in a “fox hunt” exercise
C. When playing a harmless “practical joke”
D. When you need to hide the meaning of a message for secrecy
T1G05 If an amateur pretends there is an emergency and transmits
the word “MAYDAY,” what is this called?
A. A traditional greeting in May
B. An emergency test transmission
C. False or deceptive signals
D. Nothing special; “MAYDAY” has no meaning in an emergency
T1G06 When may an amateur transmit unidentified communica-
tions?
A. Only for brief tests not meant as messages
B. Only if it does not interfere with others
C. Never, except transmissions from a space station or to control a
model craft
D. Only for two-way or third-party communications
T1G07 What is an amateur communication called that does not have
the required station identification?
A. Unidentified communications or signals
B. Reluctance modulation
C. Test emission
D. Tactical communication
T1G08 If an amateur transmits to test access to a repeater without
giving any station identification, what type of communication is this
called?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 405
A. A test emission; no identification is required
B. An illegal unmodulated transmission
C. An illegal unidentified transmission
D. A non-communication; no voice is transmitted
T1G09 When may you deliberately interfere with another station’s
communications?
A. Only if the station is operating illegally
B. Only if the station begins transmitting on a frequency you are using
C. Never
D. You may expect, and cause, deliberate interference because it can’t
be helped during crowded band conditions
T1G10 If an amateur repeatedly transmits on a frequency already
occupied by a group of amateurs in a net operation, what type of inter-
ference is this called?
A. Break-in interference
B. Harmful or malicious interference
C. Incidental interference
D. Intermittent interference
T1G11 What is a transmission called that disturbs other communi-
cations?
A. Interrupted CW
B. Harmful interference
C. Transponder signals
D. Unidentified transmissions
T1H Correct language; phonetics; beacons; radio control of model
craft and vehicles
T1H01 If you are using a language besides English to make a contact,
what language must you use when identifying your station?
406 APPENDIX A
A. The language being used for the contact
B. The language being used for the contact, provided the US has a
third-party communications agreement with that country
C. English
D. Any language of a country that is a member of the International
Telecommunication Union
T1H02 What do the FCC Rules suggest you use as an aid for correct
station identification when using phone?
A. A speech compressor
B. Q signals
C. A phonetic alphabet
D. Unique words of your choice
T1H03 What is the advantage in using the International Telecom-
munication Union (ITU) phonetic alphabet when identifying your
station?
A. The words are internationally recognized substitutes for letters
B. There is no advantage
C. The words have been chosen to be easily pronounced by Asian
cultures
D. It preserves traditions begun in the early days of Amateur Radio
T1H04 What is one reason to avoid using “cute” phrases or word
combinations to identify your station?
A. They are not easily understood by non-English-speaking amateurs
B. They might offend English-speaking amateurs
C. They do not meet FCC identification requirements
D. They might be interpreted as codes or ciphers intended to obscure
the meaning of your identification
T1H05 What is an amateur station called that transmits communica-
tions for the purpose of observation of propagation and reception?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 407
A. A beacon
B. A repeater
C. An auxiliary station
D. A radio control station
T1H06 What is the maximum transmitting power permitted an ama-
teur station in beacon operation?
A. 10 watts pep output
B. 100 watts pep output
C. 500 watts pep output
D. 1500 watts pep output
T1H07 What minimum class of amateur license must you hold to
operate a beacon or a repeater station?
A. Technician with credit for passing a Morse code exam
B. Technician
C. General
D. Amateur Extra
T1H08 What minimum information must be on a label affixed to a
transmitter used for telecommand (control) of model craft?
A. Station call sign
B. Station call sign and the station licensee’s name
C. Station call sign and the station licensee’s name and address
D. Station call sign and the station licensee’s class of license
T1H09 What is the maximum transmitter power an amateur station
is allowed when used for telecommand (control) of model craft?
A. One milliwatt
B. One watt
C. 25 watts
D. 100 watts
408 APPENDIX A
T1I Emergency communications; broadcasting; indecent and
obscene language
T1I01 If you hear a voice distress signal on a frequency outside of
your license privileges, what are you allowed to do to help the station
in distress?
A. You are NOT allowed to help because the frequency of the signal is
outside your privileges
B. You are allowed to help only if you keep your signals within the
nearest frequency band of your privileges
C. You are allowed to help on a frequency outside your privileges only
if you use international Morse code
D. You are allowed to help on a frequency outside your privileges in
any way possible
T1I02 When may you use your amateur station to transmit an “SOS”
or “MAYDAY”?
A. Never
B. Only at specific times (at 15 and 30 minutes after the hour)
C. In a life- or property-threatening emergency
D. When the National Weather Service has announced a severe
weather watch
T1I03 When may you send a distress signal on any frequency?
A. Never
B. In a life- or property-threatening emergency
C. Only at specific times (at 15 and 30 minutes after the hour)
D. When the National Weather Service has announced a severe
weather watch
T1I04 If a disaster disrupts normal communication systems in an
area where the amateur service is regulated by the FCC, what kinds of
transmissions may stations make?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 409
A. Those that are necessary to meet essential communication needs
and facilitate relief actions
B. Those that allow a commercial business to continue to operate in
the affected area
C. Those for which material compensation has been paid to the ama-
teur operator for delivery into the affected area
D. Those that are to be used for program production or news gathering
for broadcasting purposes
T1I05 What information is included in an FCC declaration of a tem-
porary state of communication emergency?
A. A list of organizations authorized to use radio communications in
the affected area
B. A list of amateur frequency bands to be used in the affected area
C. Any special conditions and special rules to be observed during the
emergency
D. An operating schedule for authorized amateur emergency stations
T1I06 What is meant by the term broadcasting?
A. Transmissions intended for reception by the general public, either
direct or relayed
B. Retransmission by automatic means of programs or signals from
non-amateur stations
C. One-way radio communications, regardless of purpose or content
D. One-way or two-way radio communications between two or more
stations
T1I07 When may you send obscene words from your amateur station?
A. Only when they do not cause interference to other communications
B. Never; obscene words are not allowed in amateur transmissions
C. Only when they are not retransmitted through a repeater
D. Any time, but there is an unwritten rule among amateurs that they
should not be used on the air
410 APPENDIX A
T1I08 When may you send indecent words from your amateur station?
A. Only when they do not cause interference to other communications
B. Only when they are not retransmitted through a repeater
C. Any time, but there is an unwritten rule among amateurs that they
should not be used on the air
D. Never; indecent words are not allowed in amateur transmissions
T1I09 Why is indecent and obscene language prohibited in the Ama-
teur Service?
A. Because it is offensive to some individuals
B. Because young children may intercept amateur communications
with readily available receiving equipment
C. Because such language is specifically prohibited by FCC Rules
D. All of these choices are correct
T1I10 Where can the official list of prohibited obscene and indecent
words be found?
A. There is no public list of prohibited obscene and indecent words; if you
believe a word is questionable, don’t use it in your communications
B. The list is maintained by the Department of Commerce
C. The list is International, and is maintained by Industry Canada
D. The list is in the “public domain,” and can be found in all amateur
study guides
T1I11 Under what conditions may a Technician class operator use
his or her station to broadcast information intended for reception by
the general public?
A. Never, broadcasting is a privilege reserved for Extra and General
class operators only
B. Only when operating in the FM broadcast band (88.1 to 107.9 MHz)
C. Only when operating in the AM broadcast band (530 to 1700 kHz)
D. Never, broadcasts intended for reception by the general public are
not permitted in the Amateur Service
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 411
Subelement T2: Operating Procedures (5 Exam
Questions—5 Groups)
T2A Preparing to transmit; choosing a frequency for tune-up; operat-
ing or emergencies; Morse code; repeater operations and autopatch
T2A01 What should you do before you transmit on any frequency?
A. Listen to make sure others are not using the frequency
B. Listen to make sure that someone will be able to hear you
C. Check your antenna for resonance at the selected frequency
D. Make sure the SWR on your antenna feed line is high enough
T2A02 If you are in contact with another station and you hear an
emergency call for help on your frequency, what should you do?
A. Tell the calling station that the frequency is in use
B. Direct the calling station to the nearest emergency net frequency
C. Call your local Civil Preparedness Office and inform them of the
emergency
D. Stop your QSO immediately and take the emergency call
T2A03 Why should local amateur communications use VHF and
UHF frequencies instead of HF frequencies?
A. To minimize interference on HF bands capable of long-distance
communication
B. Because greater output power is permitted on VHF and UHF
C. Because HF transmissions are not propagated locally
D. Because signals are louder on VHF and UHF frequencies
T2A04 How can on-the-air interference be minimized during a
lengthy transmitter testing or loading-up procedure?
A. Choose an unoccupied frequency
B. Use a dummy load
C. Use a nonresonant antenna
D. Use a resonant antenna that requires no loading-up procedure
412 APPENDIX A
T2A05 At what speed should a Morse code CQ call be transmitted?
A. Only speeds below 5 WPM
B. The highest speed your keyer will operate
C. Any speed at which you can reliably receive
D. The highest speed at which you can control the keyer
T2A06 What is an autopatch?
A. An automatic digital connection between a US and a foreign
amateur
B. A digital connection used to transfer data between a hand-held
radio and a computer
C. A device that allows radio users to access the public telephone
system
D. A video interface allowing images to be patched into a digital data
stream
T2A07 How do you call another station on a repeater if you know the
station’s call sign?
A. Say “break, break 79,” then say the station’s call sign
B. Say the station’s call sign, then identify your own station
C. Say “CQ” three times, then say the station’s call sign
D. Wait for the station to call “CQ,” then answer it
T2A08 What is a courtesy tone (used in repeater operations)?
A. A sound used to identify the repeater
B. A sound used to indicate when a transmission is complete
C. A sound used to indicate that a message is waiting for someone
D. A sound used to activate a receiver in case of severe weather
T2A09 What is the meaning of the procedural signal “DE”?
A. ”From” or “this is,” as in “W0AIH DE KA9FOX”
B. ”Directional Emissions” from your antenna
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 413
C. ”Received all correctly”
D. ”Calling any station”
T2A10 During commuting rush hours, which type of repeater opera-
tion should be discouraged?
A. Mobile stations
B. Low-power stations
C. Highway traffic information nets
D. Third-party communications nets
T2A11 What is the proper way to break into a conversation on a
repeater?
A. Wait for the end of a transmission and start calling the desired party
B. Shout, “break, break!” to show that you’re eager to join the con-
versation
C. Turn on an amplifier and override whoever is talking
D. Say your call sign during a break between transmissions
T2B Definition and proper use; courteous operation; repeater fre-
quency coordination; Morse code
T2B01 When using a repeater to communicate, which of the follow-
ing do you need to know about the repeater?
A. Its input frequency and offset
B. Its call sign
C. Its power level
D. Whether or not it has an autopatch
T2B02 What is an autopatch?
A. Something that automatically selects the strongest signal to be
repeated
B. A device that connects a mobile station to the next repeater if it
moves out of range of the first
C. A device that allows repeater users to make telephone calls from
their stations
414 APPENDIX A
D. A device that locks other stations out of a repeater when there is an
important conversation in progress
T2B03 What is the purpose of a repeater time-out timer?
A. It lets a repeater have a rest period after heavy use
B. It logs repeater transmit time to predict when a repeater will fail
C. It tells how long someone has been using a repeater
D. It limits the amount of time someone can transmit on a repeater
T2B04 What is a CTCSS (or PL) tone?
A. A special signal used for telecommand control of model craft
B. A subaudible tone, added to a carrier, which may cause a receiver
to accept a signal
C. A tone used by repeaters to mark the end of a transmission
D. A special signal used for telemetry between amateur space stations
and Earth stations
T2B05 What is the usual input/output frequency separation for
repeaters in the 2-meter band?
A. 600 kHz
B. 1.0 MHz
C. 1.6 MHz
D. 5.0 MHz
T2B06 What is the usual input/output frequency separation for
repeaters in the 1.25-meter band?
A. 600 kHz
B. 1.0 MHz
C. 1.6 MHz
D. 5.0 MHz
T2B07 What is the usual input/output frequency separation for
repeaters in the 70-centimeter band?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 415
A. 600 kHz
B. 1.0 MHz
C. 1.6 MHz
D. 5.0 MHz
T2B08 What is the purpose of repeater operation?
A. To cut your power bill by using someone else’s higher-power system
B. To help mobile and low-power stations extend their usable range
C. To transmit signals for observing propagation and reception
D. To communicate with stations in services other than amateur
T2B09 What is a repeater called that is available for anyone to use?
A. An open repeater
B. A closed repeater
C. An autopatch repeater
D. A private repeater
T2B10 Why should you pause briefly between transmissions when
using a repeater?
A. To check the SWR of the repeater
B. To reach for pencil and paper for third-party communications
C. To listen for anyone wanting to break in
D. To dial up the repeater’s autopatch
T2B11 Why should you keep transmissions short when using a
repeater?
A. A long transmission may prevent someone with an emergency from
using the repeater
B. To see if the receiving station operator is still awake
C. To give any listening non-hams a chance to respond
D. To keep long-distance charges down
416 APPENDIX A
T2C Simplex operations; RST signal reporting; choice of equipment
for desired communications; communications modes including ama-
teur television (ATV), packet radio; Q signals, procedural signals and
abbreviations
T2C01 What is simplex operation?
A. Transmitting and receiving on the same frequency
B. Transmitting and receiving over a wide area
C. Transmitting on one frequency and receiving on another
D. Transmitting one-way communications
T2C02 When should you use simplex operation instead of a
repeater?
A. When the most reliable communications are needed
B. When a contact is possible without using a repeater
C. When an emergency telephone call is needed
D. When you are traveling and need some local information
T2C03 Why should simplex be used where possible, instead of using
a repeater?
A. Signal range will be increased
B. Long distance toll charges will be avoided
C. The repeater will not be tied up unnecessarily
D. Your antenna’s effectiveness will be better tested
T2C04 If you are talking to a station using a repeater, how would you
find out if you could communicate using simplex instead?
A. See if you can clearly receive the station on the repeater’s input fre-
quency
B. See if you can clearly receive the station on a lower frequency band
C. See if you can clearly receive a more distant repeater
D. See if a third station can clearly receive both of you
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 417
T2C05 What does RST mean in a signal report?
A. Recovery, signal strength, tempo
B. Recovery, signal speed, tone
C. Readability, signal speed, tempo
D. Readability, signal strength, tone
T2C06 What is the meaning of: “Your signal report is five nine plus
20 dB...”?
A. Your signal strength has increased by a factor of 100
B. Repeat your transmission on a frequency 20 kHz higher
C. The bandwidth of your signal is 20 decibels above linearity
D. A relative signal-strength meter reading is 20 decibels greater than
strength 9
T2C07 What is the meaning of the procedural signal “CQ”?
A. ”Call on the quarter hour”
B. ”New antenna is being tested” (no station should answer)
C. ”Only the called station should transmit”
D. ”Calling any station”
T2C08 What is a QSL card in the amateur service?
A. A letter or postcard from an amateur pen pal
B. A Notice of Violation from the FCC
C. A written acknowledgment of communications between two amateurs
D. A postcard reminding you when your license will expire
T2C09 What is the correct way to call CQ when using voice?
A. Say “CQ” once, followed by “this is,” followed by your call sign
spoken three times
B. Say “CQ” at least five times, followed by “this is,” followed by your
call sign spoken once
418 APPENDIX A
C. Say “CQ” three times, followed by “this is,” followed by your call
sign spoken three times
D. Say “CQ” at least ten times, followed by “this is,” followed by your
call sign spoken once
T2C10 How should you answer a voice CQ call?
A. Say the other station’s call sign at least ten times, followed by “this
is,” then your call sign at least twice
B. Say the other station’s call sign at least five times phonetically, fol-
lowed by “this is,” then your call sign at least once
C. Say the other station’s call sign at least three times, followed by
“this is,” then your call sign at least five times phonetically
D. Say the other station’s call sign once, followed by “this is,” then
your call sign given phonetically
T2C11 What is the meaning of: “Your signal is full quieting...”?
A. Your signal is strong enough to overcome all receiver noise
B. Your signal has no spurious sounds
C. Your signal is not strong enough to be received
D. Your signal is being received, but no audio is being heard
T2D Distress calling and emergency drills and communications—oper-
ations and equipment; Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES)
T2D01 What is the proper distress call to use when operating phone?
A. Say “MAYDAY” several times
B. Say “HELP” several times
C. Say “EMERGENCY” several times
D. Say “SOS” several times
T2D02 What is the proper distress call to use when operating CW?
A. MAYDAY
B. QRRR
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 419
C. QRZ
D. SOS
T2D03 What is the proper way to interrupt a repeater conversation to
signal a distress call?
A. Say “BREAK” twice, then your call sign
B. Say “HELP” as many times as it takes to get someone to answer
C. Say “SOS,” then your call sign
D. Say “EMERGENCY” three times
T2D04 What is one reason for using tactical call signs such as “com-
mand post” or “weather center” during an emergency?
A. They keep the general public informed about what is going on
B. They are more efficient and help coordinate public-service com-
munications
C. They are required by the FCC
D. They increase goodwill between amateurs
T2D05 What type of messages concerning a person’s well-being are
sent into or out of a disaster area?
A. Routine traffic
B. Tactical traffic
C. Formal message traffic
D. Health and Welfare traffic
T2D06 What are messages called that are sent into or out of a disas-
ter area concerning the immediate safety of human life?
A. Tactical traffic
B. Emergency traffic
C. Formal message traffic
D. Health and Welfare traffic
420 APPENDIX A
T2D07 Why is it a good idea to have a way to operate your amateur
station without using commercial AC power lines?
A. So you may use your station while mobile
B. So you may provide communications in an emergency
C. So you may operate in contests where AC power is not allowed
D. So you will comply with the FCC rules
T2D08 What is the most important accessory to have for a hand-held
radio in an emergency?
A. An extra antenna
B. A portable amplifier
C. Several sets of charged batteries
D. A microphone headset for hands-free operation
T2D09 Which type of antenna would be a good choice as part of a
portable HF amateur station that could be set up in case of an emergency?
A. A three-element quad
B. A three-element Yagi
C. A dipole
D. A parabolic dish
T2D10 What is the maximum number of hours allowed per week for
RACES drills?
A. One
B. Seven, but not more than one hour per day
C. Eight
D. As many hours as you want
T2D11 How must you identify messages sent during a RACES drill?
A. As emergency messages
B. As amateur traffic
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 421
C. As official government messages
D. As drill or test messages
T2E Voice communications and phonetics; SSB/CW weak-signal
operations; radioteleprinting; packet; special operations
T2E01 To make your call sign better understood when using voice
transmissions, what should you do?
A. Use Standard International Phonetics for each letter of your call
B. Use any words that start with the same letters as your call sign for
each letter of your call
C. Talk louder
D. Turn up your microphone gain
T2E02 What does the abbreviation “RTTY” stand for?
A. ”Returning to you,” meaning “your turn to transmit”
B. Radioteletype
C. A general call to all digital stations
D. Morse code practice over the air
T2E03 What does “connected” mean in a packet-radio link?
A. A telephone link is working between two stations
B. A message has reached an amateur station for local delivery
C. A transmitting station is sending data to only one receiving station;
it replies that the data is being received correctly
D. A transmitting and receiving station are using a digipeater, so no
other contacts can take place until they are finished
T2E04 What does “monitoring” mean on a packet-radio frequency?
A. The FCC is copying all messages
B. A member of the Amateur Auxiliary to the FCC’s Compliance and
Information Bureau is copying all messages
422 APPENDIX A
C. A receiving station is displaying all messages sent to it, and reply-
ing that the messages are being received correctly
D. A receiving station is displaying all messages on the frequency, and
is not replying to any messages
T2E05 What is a digipeater?
A. A packet-radio station that retransmits only data that is marked to
be retransmitted
B. A packet-radio station that retransmits any data that it receives
C. A repeater that changes audio signals to digital data
D. A repeater built using only digital electronics parts
T2E06 What does “network” mean in packet radio?
A. A way of connecting terminal-node controllers by telephone so
data can be sent over long distances
B. A way of connecting packet-radio stations so data can be sent over
long distances
C. The wiring connections on a terminal-node controller board
D. The programming in a terminal-node controller that rejects other
callers if a station is already connected
T2E07 When should digital transmissions be used on 2-meter sim-
plex voice frequencies?
A. In between voice syllables
B. Digital operations should be avoided on simplex voice frequencies
C. Only in the evening
D. At any time, so as to encourage the best use of the band
T2E08 Which of the following modes of communication are NOT
available to a Technician class operator?
A. CW and SSB on HF bands
B. Amateur television (ATV)
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 423
C. EME (Moon bounce)
D. VHF packet, CW, and SSB
T2E09 What speed should you use when answering a CQ call using
RTTY?
A. Half the speed of the received signal
B. The same speed as the received signal
C. Twice the speed of the received signal
D. Any speed, since RTTY systems adjust to any signal speed
T2E10 When may you operate your amateur station aboard a com-
mercial aircraft?
A. At any time
B. Only while the aircraft is not in flight
C. Only with the pilot’s specific permission and not while the aircraft
is operating under Instrument Flight Rules
D. Only if you have written permission from the commercial airline
company and not during takeoff and landing
T2E11 When may you operate your amateur station somewhere in
the US besides the address listed on your license?
A. Only during times of emergency
B. Only after giving proper notice to the FCC
C. During an emergency or an FCC-approved emergency practice
D. Whenever you want to
Subelement T3: Radio-Wave Propagation (3 Exam
Questions—3 Groups)
T3A Line of sight; reflection of VHF/UHF signals
T3A01 How are VHF signals propagated within the range of the visible
horizon?
424 APPENDIX A
A. By sky wave
B. By line of sight
C. By plane wave
D. By geometric refraction
T3A02 When a signal travels in a straight line from one antenna to
another, what is this called?
A. Line-of-sight propagation
B. Straight-line propagation
C. Knife-edge diffraction
D. Tunnel ducting
T3A03 How do VHF and UHF radio waves usually travel from a
transmitting antenna to a receiving antenna?
A. They bend through the ionosphere
B. They go in a straight line
C. They wander in any direction
D. They move in a circle going either east or west from the transmitter
T3A04 What type of propagation usually occurs from one hand-held
VHF transceiver to another nearby?
A. Tunnel propagation
B. Sky-wave propagation
C. Line-of-sight propagation
D. Auroral propagation
T3A05 What causes the ionosphere to form?
A. Solar radiation ionizing the outer atmosphere
B. Temperature changes ionizing the outer atmosphere
C. Lightning ionizing the outer atmosphere
D. Release of fluorocarbons into the atmosphere
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 425
T3A06 What type of solar radiation is most responsible for ioniza-
tion in the outer atmosphere?
A. Thermal
B. Nonionized particle
C. Ultraviolet
D. Microwave
T3A07 Which two daytime ionospheric regions combine into one
region at night?
A. E and F1
B. D and E
C. F1 and F2
D. E1 and E2
T3A08 Which ionospheric region becomes one region at night, but
separates into two separate regions during the day?
A. D
B. E
C. F
D. All of these choices
T3A09 Ultraviolet solar radiation is most responsible for ionization
in what part of the atmosphere?
A. Inner
B. Outer
C. All of these choices
D. None of these choices
T3A10 What part of our atmosphere is formed by solar radiation ion-
izing the outer atmosphere?
A. Ionosphere
426 APPENDIX A
B. Troposphere
C. Ecosphere
D. Stratosphere
T3A11 What can happen to VHF or UHF signals going towards a
metal-framed building?
A. They will go around the building
B. They can be bent by the ionosphere
C. They can be easily reflected by the building
D. They are sometimes scattered in the ecosphere
T3B Tropospheric ducting or bending; amateur satellite and EME
operations
T3B01 Ducting occurs in which region of the atmosphere?
A. F2
B. Ecosphere
C. Troposphere
D. Stratosphere
T3B02 What effect does tropospheric bending have on 2-meter
radio waves?
A. It lets you contact stations farther away
B. It causes them to travel shorter distances
C. It garbles the signal
D. It reverses the sideband of the signal
T3B03 What causes tropospheric ducting of radio waves?
A. A very-low-pressure area
B. An aurora to the north
C. Lightning between the transmitting and receiving stations
D. A temperature inversion
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 427
T3B04 What causes VHF radio waves to be propagated several hun-
dred miles over oceans?
A. A polar air mass
B. A widespread temperature inversion
C. An overcast of cirriform clouds
D. A high-pressure zone
T3B05 In which of the following frequency ranges does tropospheric
ducting most often occur?
A. UHF
B. MF
C. HF
D. VLF
T3B06 What weather condition may cause tropospheric ducting?
A. A stable high-pressure system
B. An unstable low-pressure system
C. A series of low-pressure waves
D. Periods of heavy rainfall
T3B07 How does the signal loss for a given path through the tropos-
phere vary with frequency?
A. There is no relationship
B. The path loss decreases as the frequency increases
C. The path loss increases as the frequency increases
D. There is no path loss at all
T3B08 Why are high-gain antennas normally used for EME (moon-
bounce) communications?
A. To reduce the scattering of the reflected signal as it returns to Earth
B. To overcome the extreme path losses of this mode
428 APPENDIX A
C. To reduce the effects of polarization changes in the received signal
D. To overcome the high levels of solar noise at the receiver
T3B09 Which of the following antenna systems would be the best
choice for an EME (moonbounce) station?
A. A single-dipole antenna
B. An isotropic antenna
C. A ground-plane antenna
D. A high-gain array of Yagi antennas
T3B10 When is it necessary to use a higher transmitter power level
when conducting satellite communications?
A. When the satellite is at its perigee
B. When the satellite is low to the horizon
C. When the satellite is fully illuminated by the sun
D. When the satellite is near directly overhead
T3B11 Which of the following conditions must be met before two
stations can conduct real-time communications through a satellite?
A. Both stations must use circularly polarized antennas
B. The satellite must be illuminated by the sun during the communi-
cations
C. The satellite must be in view of both stations simultaneously
D. Both stations must use high-gain antenna systems
T3C Ionospheric propagation, causes and variation; maximum
usable frequency; sporadic-E propagation; ground wave, HF propaga-
tion characteristics; sunspots and the sunspot cycle
T3C01 Which region of the ionosphere is mainly responsible for
absorbing MF/HF radio signals during the daytime?
A. The F2 region
B. The F1 region
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 429
C. The E region
D. The D region
T3C02 If you are receiving a weak and distorted signal from a distant
station on a frequency close to the maximum usable frequency, what
type of propagation is probably occurring?
A. Ducting
B. Line-of-sight
C. Scatter
D. Ground-wave
T3C03 In relation to sky-wave propagation, what does the term
“maximum usable frequency” (MUF) mean?
A. The highest frequency signal that will reach its intended desti-
nation
B. The lowest frequency signal that will reach its intended destination
C. The highest frequency signal that is most absorbed by the ionosphere
D. The lowest frequency signal that is most absorbed by the ionosphere
T3C04 When a signal travels along the surface of the Earth, what is
this called?
A. Sky-wave propagation
B. Knife-edge diffraction
C. E-region propagation
D. Ground-wave propagation
T3C05 When a signal is returned to Earth by the ionosphere, what is
this called?
A. Sky-wave propagation
B. Earth-Moon-Earth propagation
C. Ground-wave propagation
D. Tropospheric propagation
430 APPENDIX A
T3C06 What is a skip zone?
A. An area covered by ground-wave propagation
B. An area covered by sky-wave propagation
C. An area that is too far away for ground-wave propagation, but too
close for sky-wave propagation
D. An area that is too far away for ground-wave or sky-wave propagation
T3C07 Which ionospheric region is closest to the Earth?
A. The A region
B. The D region
C. The E region
D. The F region
T3C08 Which region of the ionosphere is mainly responsible for
long-distance sky-wave radio communications?
A. D region
B. E region
C. F1 region
D. F2 region
T3C09 Which of the ionospheric regions may split into two regions
only during the daytime?
A. Troposphere
B. F
C. Electrostatic
D. D
T3C10 How does the number of sunspots relate to the amount of ion-
ization in the ionosphere?
A. The more sunspots there are, the greater the ionization
B. The more sunspots there are, the less the ionization
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 431
C. Unless there are sunspots, the ionization is zero
D. Sunspots do not affect the ionosphere
T3C11 How long is an average sunspot cycle?
A. 2 years
B. 5 years
C. 11 years
D. 17 years
Subelement T4: Amateur Radio Practices (4 Exam
Questions—4 Groups)
T4A Lightning protection and station grounding; safety interlocks,
antenna installation safety procedures; dummy antennas
T4A01 How can an antenna system best be protected from lightning
damage?
A. Install a balun at the antenna feed point
B. Install an RF choke in the antenna feed line
C. Ground all antennas when they are not in use
D. Install a fuse in the antenna feed line
T4A02 How can amateur station equipment best be protected from
lightning damage?
A. Use heavy insulation on the wiring
B. Never turn off the equipment
C. Disconnect the ground system from all radios
D. Disconnect all equipment from the power lines and antenna cables
T4A03 For best protection from electrical shock, what should be
grounded in an amateur station?
A. The power supply primary
B. All station equipment
432 APPENDIX A
C. The antenna feed line
D. The ac power mains
T4A04 Why would there be an interlock switch in a high-voltage
power supply to turn off the power if its cabinet is opened?
A. To keep dangerous RF radiation from leaking out through an open
cabinet
B. To keep dangerous RF radiation from coming in through an open
cabinet
C. To turn the power supply off when it is not being used
D. To keep anyone opening the cabinet from getting shocked by dan-
gerous high voltages
T4A05 Why should you wear a hard hat and safety glasses if you are
on the ground helping someone work on an antenna tower?
A. So you won’t be hurt if the tower should accidentally fall
B. To keep RF energy away from your head during antenna testing
C. To protect your head from something dropped from the tower
D. So someone passing by will know that work is being done on the
tower and will stay away
T4A06 What safety factors must you consider when using a bow
and arrow or slingshot and weight to shoot an antenna-support line
over a tree?
A. You must ensure that the line is strong enough to withstand the
shock of shooting the weight
B. You must ensure that the arrow or weight has a safe flight path if
the line breaks
C. You must ensure that the bow and arrow or slingshot is in good
working condition
D. All of these choices are correct
T4A07 Which of the following is the best way to install your antenna
in relation to overhead electric power lines?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 433
A. Always be sure your antenna wire is higher than the power line,
and crosses it at a 90-degree angle
B. Always be sure your antenna and feed line are well clear of any
power lines
C. Always be sure your antenna is lower than the power line, and
crosses it at a small angle
D. Only use vertical antennas within 100 feet of a power line
T4A08 What device is used in place of an antenna during transmitter
tests so that no signal is radiated?
A. An antenna matcher
B. A dummy antenna
C. A low-pass filter
D. A decoupling resistor
T4A09 Why would you use a dummy antenna?
A. For off-the-air transmitter testing
B. To reduce output power
C. To give comparative signal reports
D. To allow antenna tuning without causing interference
T4A10 What minimum rating should a dummy antenna have for use
with a 100-watt single-sideband phone transmitter?
A. 100 watts continuous
B. 141 watts continuous
C. 175 watts continuous
D. 200 watts continuous
T4A11 Would a 100-watt light bulb make a good dummy load for
tuning a transceiver?
A. Yes; a light bulb behaves exactly like a dummy load
B. No; the impedance of the light bulb changes as the filament gets hot
434 APPENDIX A
C. No; the light bulb would act like an open circuit
D. No; the light bulb would act like a short circuit
T4B Electrical wiring, including switch location, dangerous voltages
and currents; SWR meaning and measurements; SWR meters
T4B01 Where should the green wire in a three-wire ac line cord be
connected in a power supply?
A. To the fuse
B. To the “hot” side of the power switch
C. To the chassis
D. To the white wire
T4B02 What is the minimum voltage that is usually dangerous to
humans?
A. 30 volts
B. 100 volts
C. 1000 volts
D. 2000 volts
T4B03 How much electrical current flowing through the human
body will probably be fatal?
A. As little as 1/10 of an ampere
B. Approximately 10 amperes
C. More than 20 amperes
D. Current through the human body is never fatal
T4B04 Which body organ can be fatally affected by a very small
amount of electrical current?
A. The heart
B. The brain
C. The liver
D. The lungs
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 435
T4B05 What does an SWR reading of less than 1.5:1 mean?
A. An impedance match that is too low
B. An impedance mismatch; something may be wrong with the
antenna system
C. A fairly good impedance match
D. An antenna gain of 1.5
T4B06 What does a very high SWR reading mean?
A. The antenna is the wrong length, or there may be an open or
shorted connection somewhere in the feed line
B. The signals coming from the antenna are unusually strong, which
means very good radio conditions
C. The transmitter is putting out more power than normal, showing
that it is about to go bad
D. There is a large amount of solar radiation, which means very poor
radio conditions
T4B07 If an SWR reading at the low-frequency end of an amateur band
is 2.5:1, increasing to 5:1 at the high-frequency end of the same band,
what does this tell you about your 1/2-wavelength dipole antenna?
A. The antenna is broadbanded
B. The antenna is too long for operation on the band
C. The antenna is too short for operation on the band
D. The antenna is just right for operation on the band
T4B08 If an SWR reading at the low-frequency end of an amateur band
is 5:1, decreasing to 2.5:1 at the high-frequency end of the same band,
what does this tell you about your 1/2-wavelength dipole antenna?
A. The antenna is broadbanded
B. The antenna is too long for operation on the band
C. The antenna is too short for operation on the band
D. The antenna is just right for operation on the band
436 APPENDIX A
T4B09 What instrument is used to measure the relative impedance
match between an antenna and its feed line?
A. An ammeter
B. An ohmmeter
C. A voltmeter
D. An SWR meter
T4B10 If you use an SWR meter designed to operate on 3–30 MHz for
VHF measurements, how accurate will its readings be?
A. They will not be accurate
B. They will be accurate enough to get by
C. If it properly calibrates to full scale in the set position, they may be
accurate
D. They will be accurate providing the readings are multiplied by 4.5
T4B11 What does an SWR reading of 1:1 mean?
A. An antenna for another frequency band is probably connected
B. The best impedance match has been attained
C. No power is going to the antenna
D. The SWR meter is broken
T4C Meters and their placement in circuits, including volt, amp,
multi, peak-reading and RF watt; ratings of fuses and switches
T4C01 How is a voltmeter usually connected to a circuit under test?
A. In series with the circuit
B. In parallel with the circuit
C. In quadrature with the circuit
D. In phase with the circuit
T4C02 How is an ammeter usually connected to a circuit under test?
A. In series with the circuit
B. In parallel with the circuit
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 437
C. In quadrature with the circuit
D. In phase with the circuit
T4C03 Where should an RF wattmeter be connected for the most
accurate readings of transmitter output power?
A. At the transmitter output connector
B. At the antenna feed point
C. One-half wavelength from the transmitter output
D. One-half wavelength from the antenna feed point
T4C04 For which measurements would you normally use a multi-
meter?
A. SWR and power
B. Resistance, capacitance, and inductance
C. Resistance and reactance
D. Voltage, current, and resistance
T4C05 What might happen if you switch a multimeter to measure
resistance while you have it connected to measure voltage?
A. The multimeter would read half the actual voltage
B. It would probably destroy the meter circuitry
C. The multimeter would read twice the actual voltage
D. Nothing unusual would happen; the multimeter would measure
the circuit’s resistance
T4C06 If you switch a multimeter to read microamps and connect it
into a circuit drawing 5 amps, what might happen?
A. The multimeter would read half the actual current
B. The multimeter would read twice the actual current
C. It would probably destroy the meter circuitry
D. The multimeter would read a very small value of current
T4C07 At what line impedance do most RF watt meters usually operate?
438 APPENDIX A
A. 25 ohms
B. 50 ohms
C. 100 ohms
D. 300 ohms
T4C08 What does a directional wattmeter measure?
A. Forward and reflected power
B. The directional pattern of an antenna
C. The energy used by a transmitter
D. Thermal heating in a load resistor
T4C09 If a directional RF wattmeter reads 90 watts forward power
and 10 watts reflected power, what is the actual transmitter output
power?
A. 10 watts
B. 80 watts
C. 90 watts
D. 100 watts
T4C10 Why might you use a peak-reading RF wattmeter at your station?
A. To make sure your transmitter’s output power is not higher than
that authorized by your license class
B. To make sure your transmitter is not drawing too much power from
the ac line
C. To make sure all your transmitter’s power is being radiated by your
antenna
D. To measure transmitter input and output power at the same time
T4C11 What could happen to your transceiver if you replace its
blown 5-amp ac line fuse with a 30-amp fuse?
A. The 30-amp fuse would better protect your transceiver from using
too much current
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 439
B. The transceiver would run cooler
C. The transceiver could use more current than 5 amps and a fire
could occur
D. The transceiver would not be able to produce as much RF output
T4D RFI and its complications, resolution and responsibility
T4D01 What is meant by receiver overload?
A. Too much voltage from the power supply
B. Too much current from the power supply
C. Interference caused by strong signals from a nearby source
D. Interference caused by turning the volume up too high
T4D02 What is meant by harmonic radiation?
A. Unwanted signals at frequencies that are multiples of the funda-
mental (chosen) frequency
B. Unwanted signals that are combined with a 60-Hz hum
C. Unwanted signals caused by sympathetic vibrations from a nearby
transmitter
D. Signals that cause skip propagation to occur
T4D03 What type of filter might be connected to an amateur HF
transmitter to cut down on harmonic radiation?
A. A key-click filter
B. A low-pass filter
C. A high-pass filter
D. A CW filter
T4D04 If your neighbor reports television interference whenever you
are transmitting from your amateur station, no matter what frequency
band you use, what is probably the cause of the interference?
A. Too little transmitter harmonic suppression
B. Receiver VR tube discharge
440 APPENDIX A
C. Receiver overload
D. Incorrect antenna length
T4D05 If your neighbor reports television interference on one or two
channels only when you are transmitting on the 15-meter band, what
is probably the cause of the interference?
A. Too much low-pass filtering on the transmitter
B. De-ionization of the ionosphere near your neighbor’s TV antenna
C. TV receiver front-end overload
D. Harmonic radiation from your transmitter
T4D06 What type of filter should be connected to a TV receiver as
the first step in trying to prevent RF overload from an amateur HF sta-
tion transmission?
A. Low-pass
B. High-pass
C. Band-pass
D. Notch
T4D07 What first step should be taken at a cable TV receiver when try-
ing to prevent RF overload from an amateur HF station transmission?
A. Install a low-pass filter in the cable system transmission line
B. Tighten all connectors and inspect the cable system transmission line
C. Make sure the center conductor of the cable system transmission
line is well grounded
D. Install a ceramic filter in the cable system transmission line
T4D08 What effect might a break in a cable television transmission
line have on amateur communications?
A. Cable lines are shielded and a break cannot affect amateur commu-
nications
B. Harmonic radiation from the TV receiver may cause the amateur
transmitter to transmit off-frequency
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 441
C. TV interference may result when the amateur station is transmit-
ting, or interference may occur to the amateur receiver
D. The broken cable may pick up very high voltages when the amateur
station is transmitting
T4D09 If you are told that your amateur station is causing television
interference, what should you do?
A. First make sure that your station is operating properly, and that it
does not cause interference to your own television
B. Immediately turn off your transmitter and contact the nearest FCC
office for assistance
C. Connect a high-pass filter to the transmitter output and a low-pass
filter to the antenna-input terminals of the television
D. Continue operating normally, because you have no reason to worry
about the interference
T4D10 If harmonic radiation from your transmitter is causing inter-
ference to television receivers in your neighborhood, who is responsi-
ble for taking care of the interference?
A. The owners of the television receivers are responsible
B. Both you and the owners of the television receivers share the
responsibility
C. You alone are responsible, since your transmitter is causing the
problem
D. The FCC must decide if you or the owners of the television
receivers are responsible
T4D11 If signals from your transmitter are causing front-end over-
load in your neighbor’s television receiver, who is responsible for tak-
ing care of the interference?
A. You alone are responsible, since your transmitter is causing the
problem
B. Both you and the owner of the television receiver share the respon-
sibility
442 APPENDIX A
C. The FCC must decide if you or the owner of the television receiver
are responsible
D. The owner of the television receiver is responsible
Subelement T5: Electrical Principles (3 Exam
Questions—3 Groups)
T5A Metric prefixes, e.g., pico, nano, micro, milli, centi, kilo, mega,
giga; concepts, units and measurement of current, voltage; concept of
conductor and insulator; concept of open and short circuits
T5A01 If a dial marked in kilohertz shows a reading of 28,450 kHz,
what would it show if it were marked in hertz?
A. 284,500 Hz
B. 28,450,000 Hz
C. 284,500,000 Hz
D. 284,500,000,000 Hz
T5A02 If an ammeter marked in amperes is used to measure a 3000-
milliampere current, what reading would it show?
A. 0.003 amperes
B. 0.3 amperes
C. 3 amperes
D. 3,000,000 amperes
T5A03 How many hertz are in a kilohertz?
A. 10
B. 100
C. 1000
D. 1,000,000
T5A04 What is the basic unit of electric current?
A. The volt
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 443
B. The watt
C. The ampere
D. The ohm
T5A05 Which instrument would you use to measure electric current?
A. An ohmmeter
B. A wavemeter
C. A voltmeter
D. An ammeter
T5A06 Which instrument would you use to measure electric poten-
tial or electromotive force?
A. An ammeter
B. A voltmeter
C. A wavemeter
D. An ohmmeter
T5A07 What is the basic unit of electromotive force (EMF)?
A. The volt
B. The watt
C. The ampere
D. The ohm
T5A08 What are three good electrical conductors?
A. Copper, gold, mica
B. Gold, silver, wood
C. Gold, silver, aluminum
D. Copper, aluminum, paper
T5A09 What are four good electrical insulators?
A. Glass, air, plastic, porcelain
444 APPENDIX A
B. Glass, wood, copper, porcelain
C. Paper, glass, air, aluminum
D. Plastic, rubber, wood, carbon
T5A10 Which electrical circuit can have no current?
A. A closed circuit
B. A short circuit
C. An open circuit
D. A complete circuit
T5A11 Which electrical circuit draws too much current?
A. An open circuit
B. A dead circuit
C. A closed circuit
D. A short circuit
T5B Concepts, units, and calculation of resistance, inductance, and
capacitance values in series and parallel circuits
T5B01 What does resistance do in an electric circuit?
A. It stores energy in a magnetic field
B. It stores energy in an electric field
C. It provides electrons by a chemical reaction
D. It opposes the flow of electrons
T5B02 What is the definition of 1 ohm?
A. The reactance of a circuit in which a 1-microfarad capacitor is res-
onant at 1 MHz
B. The resistance of a circuit in which a 1-amp current flows when 1
volt is applied
C. The resistance of a circuit in which a 1-milliamp current flows
when 1 volt is applied
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 445
D. The reactance of a circuit in which a 1-millihenry inductor is reso-
nant at 1 MHz
T5B03 What is the basic unit of resistance?
A. The farad
B. The watt
C. The ohm
D. The resistor
T5B04 What is one reason resistors are used in electronic circuits?
A. To block the flow of direct current while allowing alternating cur-
rent to pass
B. To block the flow of alternating current while allowing direct cur-
rent to pass
C. To increase the voltage of the circuit
D. To control the amount of current that flows for a particular applied
voltage
T5B05 What is the ability to store energy in a magnetic field called?
A. Admittance
B. Capacitance
C. Resistance
D. Inductance
T5B06 What is one reason inductors are used in electronic circuits?
A. To block the flow of direct current while allowing alternating cur-
rent to pass
B. To reduce the flow of ac while allowing dc to pass freely
C. To change the time constant of the applied voltage
D. To change alternating current to direct current
T5B07 What is the ability to store energy in an electric field called?
446 APPENDIX A
A. Inductance
B. Resistance
C. Tolerance
D. Capacitance
T5B08 What is one reason capacitors are used in electronic circuits?
A. To block the flow of direct current while allowing alternating cur-
rent to pass
B. To block the flow of alternating current while allowing direct cur-
rent to pass
C. To change the time constant of the applied voltage
D. To change alternating current to direct current
T5B09 If two resistors are connected in series, what is their total
resistance?
A. The difference between the individual resistor values
B. Always less than the value of either resistor
C. The product of the individual resistor values
D. The sum of the individual resistor values
T5B10 If two equal-value inductors are connected in parallel, what is
their total inductance?
A. Half the value of one inductor
B. Twice the value of one inductor
C. The same as the value of either inductor
D. The value of one inductor times the value of the other
T5B11 If two equal-value capacitors are connected in series, what is
their total capacitance?
A. Twice the value of one capacitor
B. The same as the value of either capacitor
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 447
C. Half the value of either capacitor
D. The value of one capacitor times the value of the other
T5C Ohm’s Law (any calculations will be kept to a very low level—
no fractions or decimals) and the concepts of energy and power; con-
cepts of frequency, including ac vs. dc, frequency units, and
wavelength
T5C01 How is the current in a dc circuit directly calculated when the
voltage and resistance are known?
A. IR E [current equals resistance multiplied by voltage]
B. IR/E [current equals resistance divided by voltage]
C. IE/R [current equals voltage divided by resistance]
D. IE/P [current equals voltage divided by power]
T5C02 How is the resistance in a dc circuit calculated when the volt-
age and current are known?
A. RI/E [resistance equals current divided by voltage]
B. RE/I [resistance equals voltage divided by current]
C. RI E [resistance equals current multiplied by voltage]
D. RP/E [resistance equals power divided by voltage]
T5C03 How is the voltage in a dc circuit directly calculated when the
current and resistance are known?
A. EI/R [voltage equals current divided by resistance]
B. ER/I [voltage equals resistance divided by current]
C. EI R [voltage equals current multiplied by resistance]
D. EI/P [voltage equals current divided by power]
T5C04 If a current of 2 amperes flows through a 50-ohm resistor,
what is the voltage across the resistor?
A. 25 volts
B. 52 volts
448 APPENDIX A
C. 100 volts
D. 200 volts
T5C05 If a 100-ohm resistor is connected to 200 volts, what is the
current through the resistor?
A. 1 ampere
B. 2 amperes
C. 300 amperes
D. 20,000 amperes
T5C06 If a current of 3 amperes flows through a resistor connected to
90 volts, what is the resistance?
A. 3 ohms
B. 30 ohms
C. 93 ohms
D. 270 ohms
T5C07 What term describes how fast electrical energy is used?
A. Resistance
B. Current
C. Power
D. Voltage
T5C08 What is the basic unit of electrical power?
A. The ohm
B. The watt
C. The volt
D. The ampere
T5C09 What happens to a signal’s wavelength as its frequency
increases?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 449
A. It gets shorter
B. It gets longer
C. It stays the same
D. It disappears
T5C10 What is the name of a current that flows back and forth, first
in one direction, then in the opposite direction?
A. An alternating current
B. A direct current
C. A rough current
D. A steady state current
T5C11 What is the name of a current that flows only in one direction?
A. An alternating current
B. A direct current
C. A normal current
D. A smooth current
Subelement T6—Circuit Components (2 Exam
Questions—2 Groups)
T6A Electrical function and/or schematic representation of resistor,
switch, fuse, or battery; resistor construction types, variable and fixed,
color code, power ratings, schematic symbols
T6A01 What does a variable resistor or potentiometer do?
A. Its resistance changes when ac is applied to it
B. It transforms a variable voltage into a constant voltage
C. Its resistance changes when its slide or contact is moved
D. Its resistance changes when it is heated
T6A02 Which symbol of Figure T6-1 represents a fixed resistor?
450 APPENDIX A
A. Symbol 2
B. Symbol 3
C. Symbol 4
D. Symbol 5
T6A03 Why would you use a double-pole, single-throw switch?
A. To switch one input to one output
B. To switch one input to either of two outputs
C. To switch two inputs at the same time, one input to either of two
outputs, and the other input to either of two outputs
D. To switch two inputs at the same time, one input to one output, and
the other input to the other output
T6A04 In Figure T6-2, which symbol represents a single-pole, single-
throw switch?
A. Symbol 1
B. Symbol 2
1 3 42
+
+
+
3
1
2
4
5
6
Audio
input
signal
Amplified
audio
output
signal
F I G U R E T 6 - 1
F I G U R E T 6 - 2
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 451
C. Symbol 3
D. Symbol 4
T6A05 Why would you use a fuse?
A. To create a short circuit when there is too much current in a circuit
B. To change direct current into alternating current
C. To change alternating current into direct current
D. To create an open circuit when there is too much current in a circuit
T6A06 In Figure T6-3, which symbol represents a fuse?
A. Symbol 1
B. Symbol 3
C. Symbol 5
D. Symbol 7
T6A07 Which of these components has a positive and a negative side?
A. A battery
B. A potentiometer
C. A fuse
D. A resistor
T6A08 In Figure T6-3, which symbol represents a single-cell battery?
A. Symbol 7
1 3 42
5 7 86
F I G U R E T 6 - 3
452 APPENDIX A
B. Symbol 5
C. Symbol 1
D. Symbol 4
T6A09 Why would a large-size resistor be used instead of a smaller
one of the same resistance value?
A. For better response time
B. For a higher current gain
C. For greater power dissipation
D. For less impedance in the circuit
T6A10 What do the first three color bands on a resistor indicate?
A. The value of the resistor in ohms
B. The resistance tolerance in percent
C. The power rating in watts
D. The resistance material
T6A11 Which tolerance rating would indicate a high-precision
resistor?
A. 0.1%
B. 5%
C. 10%
D. 20%
T6B Electrical function and/or schematic representation of a ground,
antenna, inductor, capacitor, transistor, integrated circuit; construc-
tion of variable and fixed inductors and capacitors; factors affecting
inductance and capacitance
T6B01 Which component can amplify a small signal using low
voltages?
A. A pnp transistor
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 453
B. A variable resistor
C. An electrolytic capacitor
D. A multiple-cell battery
T6B02 Which component is used to radiate radio energy?
A. An antenna
B. An earth ground
C. A chassis ground
D. A potentiometer
T6B03 In Figure T6-3, which symbol represents an earth ground?
A. Symbol 2
B. Symbol 5
C. Symbol 6
D. Symbol 8
T6B04 In Figure T6-3, which symbol represents an antenna?
A. Symbol 2
B. Symbol 3
C. Symbol 6
D. Symbol 7
T6B05 In Figure T6-4, which symbol represents an npn transistor?
1
3 4
2
F I G U R E T 6 - 4
454 APPENDIX A
A. Symbol 1
B. Symbol 2
C. Symbol 3
D. Symbol 4
T6B06 Which symbol of Figure T6-5 represents a fixed-value
capacitor?
A. Symbol 1
B. Symbol 2
C. Symbol 3
D. Symbol 4
T6B07 In Figure T6-5, which symbol represents a variable capacitor?
A. Symbol 1
B. Symbol 2
C. Symbol 3
D. Symbol 4
T6B08 What does an inductor do?
A. It stores energy electrostatically and opposes a change in voltage
B. It stores energy electrochemically and opposes a change in current
C. It stores energy electromagnetically and opposes a change in current
D. It stores energy electromechanically and opposes a change in volt-
age
1 2
3 4
F I G U R E T 6 - 5
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 455
T6B09 As an iron core is inserted in a coil, what happens to the coil’s
inductance?
A. It increases
B. It decreases
C. It stays the same
D. It disappears
T6B10 What does a capacitor do?
A. It stores energy electrochemically and opposes a change in current
B. It stores energy electrostatically and opposes a change in voltage
C. It stores energy electromagnetically and opposes a change in
current
D. It stores energy electromechanically and opposes a change in
voltage
T6B11 What determines the capacitance of a capacitor?
A. The material between the plates, the area of one side of one plate,
the number of plates, and the spacing between the plates
B. The material between the plates, the number of plates, and the size
of the wires connected to the plates
C. The number of plates, the spacing between the plates and whether
the dielectric material is n type or p type
D. The material between the plates, the area of one plate, the number
of plates, and the material used for the protective coating
Subelement T7: Practical Circuits (2 Exam
Questions—2 Groups)
T7A Functional layout of station components including transmit-
ter, transceiver, receiver, power supply, antenna, antenna switch,
antenna feed line, impedance-matching device, SWR meter; station
layout and accessories for radiotelephone, radioteleprinter (RTTY),
or packet
456 APPENDIX A
T7A01 What would you connect to your transceiver if you wanted to
switch it between several antennas?
A. A terminal-node switch
B. An antenna switch
C. A telegraph key switch
D. A high-pass filter
T7A02 What connects your transceiver to your antenna?
A. A dummy load
B. A ground wire
C. The power cord
D. A feed line
T7A03 If your mobile transceiver works in your car but not in your
home, what should you check first?
A. The power supply
B. The speaker
C. The microphone
D. The SWR meter
T7A04 What does an antenna tuner do?
A. It matches a transceiver output impedance to the antenna system
impedance
B. It helps a receiver automatically tune in stations that are far away
C. It switches an antenna system to a transceiver when sending, and to
a receiver when listening
D. It switches a transceiver between different kinds of antennas con-
nected to one feed line
T7A05 In Figure T7-1, if block 1 is a transceiver and block 3 is a
dummy antenna, what is block 2?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 457
A. A terminal-node switch
B. An antenna switch
C. A telegraph key switch
D. A high-pass filter
T7A06 In Figure T7-1, if block 1 is a transceiver and block 2 is an
antenna switch, what is block 3?
A. A terminal-node switch
B. An SWR meter
C. A telegraph key switch
D. A dummy antenna
T7A07 In Figure T7-2, if block 1 is a transceiver and block 3 is an
antenna switch, what is block 2?
A. A terminal-node switch
B. A dipole antenna
C. An SWR meter
D. A high-pass filter
Antenna
1 2 3
1 2 3
Dipole
Beam
Dummy
load
F I G U R E T 7 - 1
F I G U R E T 7 - 2
458 APPENDIX A
T7A08 In Figure T7-3, if block 1 is a transceiver and block 2 is an
SWR meter, what is block 3?
A. An antenna switch
B. An antenna tuner
C. A key-click filter
D. A terminal-node controller
T7A09 What would you connect to a transceiver for voice operation?
A. A splatter filter
B. A terminal-voice controller
C. A receiver audio filter
D. A microphone
T7A10 What would you connect to a transceiver for RTTY operation?
A. A modem and a teleprinter or computer system
B. A computer, a printer, and a RTTY refresh unit
C. A data-inverter controller
D. A modem, a monitor, and a DTMF keypad
T7A11 In packet-radio operation, what equipment connects to a ter-
minal-node controller?
A. A transceiver and a modem
B. A transceiver and a terminal or computer system
C. A DTMF keypad, a monitor, and a transceiver
D. A DTMF microphone, a monitor, and a transceiver
1 2 3
Antenna
F I G U R E T 7 - 3
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 459
T7B Transmitter and receiver block diagrams; purpose and operation
of low-pass, high-pass, and band-pass filters
T7B01 What circuit uses a limiter and a frequency discriminator to
produce an audio signal?
A. A double-conversion receiver
B. A variable-frequency oscillator
C. A superheterodyne receiver
D. An FM receiver
T7B02 What circuit is pictured in Figure T7-4 if block 1 is a variable-
frequency oscillator?
A. A packet-radio transmitter
B. A crystal-controlled transmitter
C. A single-sideband transmitter
D. A VFO-controlled transmitter
T7B03 What circuit is pictured in Figure T7-4 if block 1 is a crystal
oscillator?
A. A crystal-controlled transmitter
B. A VFO-controlled transmitter
C. A single-sideband transmitter
D. A CW transceiver
T7B04 What type of circuit does Figure T7-5 represent if block 1 is a
product detector?
1 Driver Power
amplifier
Telegraph
key
Antenna
F I G U R E T 7 - 4
460 APPENDIX A
A. A simple phase modulation receiver
B. A simple FM receiver
C. A simple CW and SSB receiver
D. A double-conversion multiplier
T7B05 If Figure T7-5 is a diagram of a simple single-sideband
receiver, what type of circuit should be shown in block 1?
A. A high-pass filter
B. A ratio detector
C. A low-pass filter
D. A product detector
T7B06 What circuit is pictured in Figure T7-6, if block 1 is a fre-
quency discriminator?
Antenna
Mixer 1
Intermediate
frequency
amplifier
Audio
amplifier
Oscillator Beat
frequency
oscillator
Antenna
Mixer Wide
filter
Radio
frequency
amplifier
Intermediate
frequency
amplifier
Limiter Block 1
Oscillator
Audio
amplifier
F I G U R E T 7 - 5
F I G U R E T 7 - 6
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 461
A. A double-conversion receiver
B. A variable-frequency oscillator
C. A superheterodyne receiver
D. An FM receiver
T7B07 Why do modern HF transmitters have a built-in low-pass fil-
ter in their RF output circuits?
A. To reduce RF energy below a cutoff point
B. To reduce low-frequency interference to other amateurs
C. To reduce harmonic radiation
D. To reduce fundamental radiation
T7B08 What circuit blocks RF energy above and below certain limits?
A. A band-pass filter
B. A high-pass filter
C. An input filter
D. A low-pass filter
T7B09 What type of filter is used in the IF section of receivers to
block energy outside a certain frequency range?
A. A band-pass filter
B. A high-pass filter
C. An input filter
D. A low-pass filter
T7B10 What circuit function is found in all types of receivers?
A. An audio filter
B. A beat-frequency oscillator
C. A detector
D. An RF amplifier
T7B11 What would you use to connect a dual-band antenna to a
mobile transceiver which has separate VHF and UHF outputs?
462 APPENDIX A
A. A dual-needle SWR meter
B. A full-duplex phone patch
C. Twin high-pass filters
D. A duplexer
Subelement T8: Signals and Emissions (2 Exam
Questions—2 Groups)
T8A RF carrier, definition, and typical bandwidths; harmonics and
unwanted signals; chirp; superimposed hum; equipment and adjust-
ments to help reduce interference to others
T8A01 What is an RF carrier?
A. The part of a transmitter that carries the signal to the transmitter
antenna
B. The part of a receiver that carries the signal from the antenna to the
detector
C. A radio frequency signal that is modulated to produce a radiotele-
phone signal
D. A modulation that changes a radio frequency signal to produce a
radiotelephone signal
T8A02 Which list of emission types is in order from the narrowest
bandwidth to the widest bandwidth?
A. RTTY, CW, SSB voice, FM voice
B. CW, FM voice, RTTY, SSB voice
C. CW, RTTY, SSB voice, FM voice
D. CW, SSB voice, RTTY, FM voice
T8A03 What is the usual bandwidth of a single-sideband amateur
signal?
A. 1 kHz
B. 2 kHz
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 463
C. Between 3 and 6 kHz
D. Between 2 and 3 kHz
T8A04 What is the usual bandwidth of a frequency-modulated ama-
teur signal?
A. Less than 5 kHz
B. Between 5 and 10 kHz
C. Between 10 and 20 kHz
D. Greater than 20 kHz
T8A05 What is the name for emissions produced by switching a
transmitter’s output on and off?
A. Phone
B. Test
C. CW
D. RTTY
T8A06 What term describes the process of combining an information
signal with a radio signal?
A. Superposition
B. Modulation
C. Demodulation
D. Phase-inversion
T8A07 What is the result of overdeviation in an FM transmitter?
A. Increased transmitter power
B. Out-of-channel emissions
C. Increased transmitter range
D. Poor carrier suppression
T8A08 What causes splatter interference?
464 APPENDIX A
A. Keying a transmitter too fast
B. Signals from a transmitter’s output circuit are being sent back to its
input circuit
C. Overmodulation of a transmitter
D. The transmitting antenna is the wrong length
T8A09 How does the frequency of a harmonic compare to the
desired transmitting frequency?
A. It is slightly more than the desired frequency
B. It is slightly less than the desired frequency
C. It is exactly two, or three, or more times the desired frequency
D. It is much less than the desired frequency
T8A10 What should you check if you change your transceiver’s
microphone from a mobile type to a base-station type?
A. Check the CTCSS levels on the oscilloscope
B. Make an on-the-air radio check to ensure the quality of your signal
C. Check the amount of current the transceiver is now using
D. Check to make sure the frequency readout is now correct
T8A11 Why is good station grounding needed when connecting your
computer to your transceiver to receive high-frequency data signals?
A. Good grounding raises the receiver’s noise floor
B. Good grounding protects the computer from nearby lightning
strikes
C. Good grounding will minimize stray noise on the receiver
D. FCC rules require all equipment to be grounded
T8B Concepts and types of modulation: CW, phone, RTTY, and data
emission types; FM deviation
T8B01 What is the name for packet-radio emissions?
A. CW
B. Data
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 465
C. Phone
D. RTTY
T8B02 What is the name of the voice emission most used on
VHF/UHF repeaters?
A. Single-sideband phone
B. Pulse-modulated phone
C. Slow-scan phone
D. Frequency-modulated phone
T8B03 What is meant by the upper sideband (USB)?
A. The part of a single-sideband signal that is above the carrier fre-
quency
B. The part of a single-sideband signal that is below the carrier fre-
quency
C. Any frequency above 10 MHz
D. The carrier frequency of a single-sideband signal
T8B04 What does the term “phone transmissions” usually mean?
A. The use of telephones to set up an amateur contact
B. A phone patch between amateur radio and the telephone system
C. AM, FM, or SSB voice transmissions by radiotelephony
D. Placing the telephone handset near a transceiver’s microphone and
speaker to relay a telephone call
T8B05 How is an HF RTTY signal usually produced?
A. By frequency-shift keying an RF signal
B. By on/off keying an RF signal
C. By digital pulse-code keying of an unmodulated carrier
D. By on/off keying an audio-frequency signal
T8B06 What are two advantages to using modern data-transmission
techniques for communications?
466 APPENDIX A
A. Very simple and low-cost equipment
B. No parity-checking required and high transmission speed
C. Easy for mobile stations to use and no additional cabling required
D. High transmission speed and communications reliability
T8B07 Which sideband is commonly used for 10-meter phone
operation?
A. Upper sideband
B. Lower sideband
C. Amplitude-compandored sideband
D. Double sideband
T8B08 What can you do if you are told your FM hand-held or mobile
transceiver is overdeviating?
A. Talk louder into the microphone
B. Let the transceiver cool off
C. Change to a higher power level
D. Talk farther away from the microphone
T8B09 What does chirp mean?
A. An overload in a receiver’s audio circuit whenever CW is received
B. A high-pitched tone that is received along with a CW signal
C. A small change in a transmitter’s frequency each time it is keyed
D. A slow change in transmitter frequency as the circuit warms up
Subelement T9: Antennas and Feed Lines (2 Exam
Questions—2 Groups)
T9A Wavelength vs. antenna length; 1/2 wavelength dipole and 1/4
wavelength vertical antennas; multiband antennas
T9A01 How do you calculate the length (in feet) of a half-wavelength
dipole antenna?
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 467
A. Divide 150 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [150/f (in
MHz)]
B. Divide 234 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [234/f (in
MHz)]
C. Divide 300 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [300/f (in
MHz)]
D. Divide 468 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [468/f (in
MHz)]
T9A02 How do you calculate the length (in feet) of a quarter-wave-
length vertical antenna?
A. Divide 150 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [150/f (in
MHz)]
B. Divide 234 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [234/f (in
MHz)]
C. Divide 300 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [300/f (in
MHz)]
D. Divide 468 by the antenna’s operating frequency (in MHz) [468/f (in
MHz)]
T9A03 How long should you make a quarter-wavelength vertical
antenna for 440 MHz (measured to the nearest inch)?
A. 12 inches
B. 9 inches
C. 6 inches
D. 3 inches
T9A04 How long should you make a quarter-wavelength vertical
antenna for 28.450 MHz (measured to the nearest foot)?
A. 8 ft
B. 12 ft
C. 16 ft
D. 24 ft
468 APPENDIX A
T9A05 How long should you make a quarter-wavelength vertical
antenna for 146 MHz (measured to the nearest inch)?
A. 112 inches
B. 50 inches
C. 19 inches
D. 12 inches
T9A06 If an antenna is made longer, what happens to its resonant
frequency?
A. It decreases
B. It increases
C. It stays the same
D. It disappears
T9A07 If an antenna is made shorter, what happens to its resonant
frequency?
A. It decreases
B. It increases
C. It stays the same
D. It disappears
T9A08 How could you decrease the resonant frequency of a dipole
antenna?
A. Lengthen the antenna
B. Shorten the antenna
C. Use less feed line
D. Use a smaller size feed line
T9A09 How could you increase the resonant frequency of a dipole
antenna?
A. Lengthen the antenna
B. Shorten the antenna
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 469
C. Use more feed line
D. Use a larger size feed line
T9A10 What is one advantage to using a multiband antenna?
A. You can operate on several bands with a single feed line
B. Multiband antennas always have high gain
C. You can transmit on several frequencies simultaneously
D. Multiband antennas offer poor harmonic suppression
T9A11 What is one disadvantage to using a multiband antenna?
A. It must always be used with a balun
B. It will always have low gain
C. It cannot handle high power
D. It can radiate unwanted harmonics
T9B Parasitic beam directional antennas; polarization, impedance
matching and SWR, feed lines, balanced vs. unbalanced (including
baluns)
T9B01 What is a directional antenna?
A. An antenna that sends and receives radio energy equally well in all
directions
B. An antenna that cannot send and receive radio energy by skywave
or skip propagation
C. An antenna that sends and receives radio energy mainly in one
direction
D. An antenna that uses a directional coupler to measure power trans-
mitted
T9B02 How is a Yagi antenna constructed?
A. Two or more straight, parallel elements are fixed in line with each
other
B. Two or more square or circular loops are fixed in line with each
other
470 APPENDIX A
C. Two or more square or circular loops are stacked inside each other
D. A straight element is fixed in the center of three or more elements
that angle toward the ground
T9B03 How many directly driven elements do most parasitic beam
antennas have?
A. None
B. One
C. Two
D. Three
T9B04 What is a parasitic beam antenna?
A. An antenna in which some elements obtain their radio energy by
induction or radiation from a driven element
B. An antenna in which wave traps are used to magnetically couple
the elements
C. An antenna in which all elements are driven by direct connection
to the feed line
D. An antenna in which the driven element obtains its radio energy by
induction or radiation from director elements
T9B05 What are the parasitic elements of a Yagi antenna?
A. The driven element and any reflectors
B. The director and the driven element
C. Only the reflectors (if any)
D. Any directors or any reflectors
T9B06 What is a cubical quad antenna?
A. Four straight, parallel elements in line with each other, each
approximately 1/2-electrical wavelength long
B. Two or more parallel four-sided wire loops, each approximately
one-electrical wavelength long
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 471
C. A vertical conductor 1/4-electrical wavelength high, fed at the bottom
D. A center-fed wire 1/2-electrical wavelength long
T9B07 What type of nondirectional antenna is easy to make at home
and works well outdoors?
A. A Yagi
B. A delta loop
C. A cubical quad
D. A ground plane
T9B08 What electromagnetic-wave polarization does most man-
made electrical noise have in the HF and VHF spectrum?
A. Horizontal
B. Left-hand circular
C. Right-hand circular
D. Vertical
T9B09 What does standing-wave ratio mean?
A. The ratio of maximum to minimum inductances on a feed line
B. The ratio of maximum to minimum capacitances on a feed line
C. The ratio of maximum to minimum impedances on a feed line
D. The ratio of maximum to minimum voltages on a feed line
T9B10 Where would you install a balun to feed a dipole antenna
with 50-ohm coaxial cable?
A. Between the coaxial cable and the antenna
B. Between the transmitter and the coaxial cable
C. Between the antenna and the ground
D. Between the coaxial cable and the ground
T9B11 Why does coaxial cable make a good antenna feed line?
472 APPENDIX A
A. You can make it at home, and its impedance matches most amateur
antennas
B. It is weatherproof, and it can be used near metal objects
C. It is weatherproof, and its impedance is higher than that of most
amateur antennas
D. It can be used near metal objects, and its impedance is higher than
that of most amateur antennas
Subelement T0: RF Safety (3 Exam Questions—
3 Groups)
T0A RF safety fundamentals, terms, and definitions
T0A01 Why is it a good idea to adhere to the FCC’s Rules for using
the minimum power needed when you are transmitting with your
hand-held radio?
A. Large fines are always imposed on operators violating this rule
B. To reduce the level of RF radiation exposure to the operator’s head
C. To reduce calcification of the NiCd battery pack
D. To eliminate self oscillation in the receiver RF amplifier
T0A02 Over what frequency range are the FCC Regulations most
stringent for RF radiation exposure?
A. Frequencies below 300 kHz
B. Frequencies between 300 kHz and 3 MHz
C. Frequencies between 3 MHz and 30 MHz
D. Frequencies between 30 MHz and 300 MHz
T0A03 What is one biological effect to the eye that can result from RF
exposure?
A. The strong magnetic fields can cause blurred vision
B. The strong magnetic fields can cause polarization lens
C. It can cause heating, which can result in the formation of cataracts
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 473
D. It can cause heating, which can result in astigmatism
T0A04 In the far field, as the distance from the source increases, how
does power density vary?
A. The power density is proportional to the square of the distance
B. The power density is proportional to the square root of the distance
C. The power density is proportional to the inverse square of the
distance
D. The power density is proportional to the inverse cube of the
distance
T0A05 In the near field, how does the field strength vary with dis-
tance from the source?
A. It always increases with the cube of the distance
B. It always decreases with the cube of the distance
C. It varies as a sine wave with distance
D. It depends on the type of antenna being used
T0A06 Why should you never look into the open end of a microwave
feed horn antenna while the transmitter is operating?
A. You may be exposing your eyes to more than the maximum per-
missible exposure of RF radiation
B. You may be exposing your eyes to more than the maximum per-
missible exposure level of infrared radiation
C. You may be exposing your eyes to more than the maximum per-
missible exposure level of ultraviolet radiation
D. All of these choices are correct
T0A07 Why are Amateur Radio operators required to meet the FCC
RF radiation exposure limits?
A. The standards are applied equally to all radio services
B. To ensure that RF radiation occurs only in a desired direction
474 APPENDIX A
C. Because amateur station operations are more easily adjusted than
those of commercial radio services
D. To ensure a safe operating environment for amateurs, their families,
and neighbors
T0A08 Why are the maximum permissible exposure (MPE) levels
not uniform throughout the radio spectrum?
A. The human body absorbs energy differently at various frequencies
B. Some frequency ranges have a cooling effect while others have a
heating effect on the body
C. Some frequency ranges have no effect on the body
D. Radiation at some frequencies can have a catalytic effect on the
body
T0A09 What does the term “specific absorption rate,” or SAR, mean?
A. The degree of RF energy consumed by the ionosphere
B. The rate at which transmitter energy is lost because of a poor feed
line
C. The rate at which RF energy is absorbed into the human body
D. The amount of signal weakening caused by atmospheric phenomena
T0A10 On what value are the maximum permissible exposure (MPE)
limits based?
A. The square of the mass of the exposed body
B. The square root of the mass of the exposed body
C. The whole-body specific gravity (WBSG)
D. The whole-body specific absorption rate (SAR)
T0B RF safety rules and guidelines
T0B01 Where will you find the applicable FCC RF radiation maxi-
mum permissible exposure (MPE) limits defined?
A. FCC Part 97 Amateur Service Rules and Regulations
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 475
B. FCC Part 15 Radiation Exposure Rules and Regulations
C. FCC Part 1 and Office of Engineering and Technology (OET) Bul-
letin 65
D. Environmental Protection Agency Regulation 65
T0B02 What factors must you consider if your repeater station
antenna will be located at a site that is occupied by antennas for trans-
mitters in other services?
A. Your radiated signal must be considered as part of the total RF radi-
ation from the site when determining RF radiation exposure levels
B. Each individual transmitting station at a multiple transmitter site
must meet the RF radiation exposure levels
C. Each station at a multiple-transmitter site may add no more than
1% of the maximum permissible exposure (MPE) for that site
D. Amateur stations are categorically excluded from RF radiation
exposure evaluation at multiple-transmitter sites
T0B03 To determine compliance with the maximum permitted expo-
sure (MPE) levels, safe exposure levels for RF energy are averaged for
an “uncontrolled” RF environment over what time period?
A. 6 minutes
B. 10 minutes
C. 15 minutes
D. 30 minutes
T0B04 To determine compliance with the maximum permitted expo-
sure (MPE) levels, safe exposure levels for RF energy are averaged for
a “controlled” RF environment over what time period?
A. 6 minutes
B. 10 minutes
C. 15 minutes
D. 30 minutes
476 APPENDIX A
T0B05 Which of the following categories describes most common
amateur use of a hand-held transceiver?
A. Mobile devices
B. Portable devices
C. Fixed devices
D. None of these choices is correct
T0B06 How does an Amateur Radio operator demonstrate that he or
she has read and understood the FCC rules about RF-radiation exposure?
A. By indicating his or her understanding of this requirement on an
amateur license application form at the time of application
B. By posting a copy of Part 97 at the station
C. By completing an FCC Environmental Assessment Form
D. By completing an FCC Environmental Impact Statement
T0B07 What amateur stations must comply with the requirements
for RF radiation exposure spelled out in Part 97?
A. Stations with antennas that exceed 10 dBi of gain
B. Stations that have a duty cycle greater than 50 percent
C. Stations that run more than 50 watts peak envelope power (pep)
D. All amateur stations regardless of power
T0B08 Who is responsible for ensuring that an amateur station com-
plies with FCC Rules about RF radiation exposure?
A. The Federal Communications Commission
B. The Environmental Protection Agency
C. The licensee of the amateur station
D. The Food and Drug Administration
T0B09 Why do exposure limits vary with frequency?
A. Lower-frequency RF fields have more energy than higher-frequency
fields
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 477
B. Lower-frequency RF fields penetrate deeper into the body than
higher-frequency fields
C. The body’s ability to absorb RF energy varies with frequency
D. It is impossible to measure specific absorption rates at some fre-
quencies
T0B10 Why is the concept of “duty cycle” one factor used to deter-
mine safe RF radiation exposure levels?
A. It takes into account the amount of time the transmitter is operating
at full power during a single transmission
B. It takes into account the transmitter power supply rating
C. It takes into account the antenna feed line loss
D. It takes into account the thermal effects of the final amplifier
T0B11 From an RF safety standpoint, what impact does the duty
cycle have on the minimum safe distance separating an antenna and
the neighboring environment?
A. The lower the duty cycle, the shorter the compliance distance
B. The compliance distance is increased with an increase in the duty
cycle
C. Lower duty cycles subject the environment to lower radio-fre-
quency radiation cycles
D. All of these answers are correct
T0C Routine station evaluation (Practical applications for VHF/UHF
and above operations)
T0C01 If you do not have the equipment to measure the RF power
densities present at your station, what might you do to ensure compli-
ance with the FCC RF radiation exposure limits?
A. Use one or more of the methods included in the amateur supple-
ment to FCC OET Bulletin 65
B. Call an FCC-Certified Test Technician to perform the measurements
for you
478 APPENDIX A
C. Reduce power from 200 watts pep to 100 watts pep
D. Operate only low-duty-cycle modes such as FM
T0C02 Is it necessary for you to perform mathematical calculations
of the RF radiation exposure if your station transmits with more than
50 watts peak envelope power (pep)?
A. Yes, calculations are always required to ensure greatest accuracy
B. Calculations are required if your station is located in a densely pop-
ulated neighborhood
C. No, calculations may not give accurate results, so measurements
are always required
D. No, there are alternate means to determine if your station meets the
RF radiation exposure limits
T0C03 Why should you make sure the antenna of a hand-held trans-
ceiver is not too close to your head when transmitting?
A. To help the antenna radiate energy equally in all directions
B. To reduce your exposure to the radio-frequency energy
C. To use your body to reflect the signal in one direction
D. To keep electrostatic charges from harming the operator
T0C04 What should you do for safety if you put up a UHF transmit-
ting antenna?
A. Make sure the antenna will be in a place where no one can get near
it when you are transmitting
B. Make sure that RF field screens are in place
C. Make sure the antenna is near the ground to keep its RF energy
pointing in the correct direction
D. Make sure you connect an RF leakage filter at the antenna feed point
T0C05 How should you position the antenna of a hand-held trans-
ceiver while you are transmitting?
A. Away from your head and away from others
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 479
B. Towards the station you are contacting
C. Away from the station you are contacting
D. Down to bounce the signal off the ground
T0C06 Why should your antennas be located so that no one can
touch them while you are transmitting?
A. Touching the antenna might cause television interference
B. Touching the antenna might cause RF burns
C. Touching the antenna might cause it to radiate harmonics
D. Touching the antenna might cause it to go into self-oscillation
T0C07 For the lowest RF radiation exposure to passengers, where
would you mount your mobile antenna?
A. On the trunk lid
B. On the roof
C. On a front fender opposite the broadcast radio antenna
D. On one side of the rear bumper
T0C08 What should you do for safety before removing the shielding
on a UHF power amplifier?
A. Make sure all RF screens are in place at the antenna feed line
B. Make sure the antenna feed line is properly grounded
C. Make sure the amplifier cannot accidentally be turned on
D. Make sure that RF leakage filters are connected
T0C09 Why might mobile transceivers produce less RF radiation
exposure than hand-held transceivers in mobile operations?
A. They do not produce less exposure because they usually have
higher power levels
B. They have a higher duty cycle
C. When mounted on a metal vehicle roof, mobile antennas are gener-
ally well shielded from vehicle occupants
480 APPENDIX A
D. Larger transmitters dissipate heat and energy more readily
T0C10 What are some reasons you should never operate a power
amplifier unless its covers are in place?
A. To maintain the required high operating temperatures of the equip-
ment and reduce RF radiation exposure
B. To reduce the risk of shock from high voltages and reduce RF radi-
ation exposure
C. To ensure that the amplifier will go into self oscillation and to min-
imize the effects of stray capacitance
D. To minimize the effects of stray inductance and to reduce the risk
of shock from high voltages
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 481
T1A01 B
T1A02 D
T1A03 D
T1A04 C
T1A05 C
T1A06 A
T1A07 D
T1A08 C
T1A09 A
T1A10 C
T1A11 A
T1A12 B
T1B01 B
T1B02 B
T1B03 B
T1B04 C
T1B05 D
T1B06 B
T1B07 A
T1B08 B
T1B09 C
T1B10 A
T1B11 C
T1B12 C
T1C01 D
T1C02 B
T1C03 A
T1C04 D
T1C05 A
T1C06 D
T1C07 C
T1C08 C
T1C09 D
T1C10 D
T1C11 C
T1D01 D
T1D02 C
T1D03 D
T1D04 C
T1D05 B
T1D06 A
T1D07 C
T1D08 A
T1D09 C
T1D10 B
T1D11 A
T1D12 C
T1E01 D
T1E02 A
T1E03 B
T1E04 D
T1E05 A
T1E06 B
T1E07 A
T1E08 A
T1E09 C
T1E10 B
T1E11 A
T1E12 D
T1F01 C
T1F02 C
T1F03 A
T1F04 D
T1F05 D
T1F06 D
T1F07 A
T1F08 D
T1F09 C
T1F10 D
T1F11 C
T1F12 B
T1G01 C
T1G02 B
T1G03 A
T1G04 A
T1G05 C
T1G06 C
T1G07 A
T1G08 C
T1G09 C
T1G10 B
T1G11 B
T1H01 C
T1H02 C
T1H03 A
T1H04 A
T1H05 A
T1H06 B
T1H07 B
T1H08 C
T1H09 B
T1I01 D
T1I02 C
T1I03 B
T1I04 A
T1I05 C
T1I06 A
T1I07 B
T1I08 D
T1I09 D
T1I10 A
T1I11 D
T2A01 A
T2A02 D
T2A03 A
T2A04 B
T2A05 C
T2A06 C
Answers
482 APPENDIX A
T2A07 B
T2A08 B
T2A09 A
T2A10 D
T2A11 D
T2B01 A
T2B02 C
T2B03 D
T2B04 B
T2B05 A
T2B06 C
T2B07 D
T2B08 B
T2B09 A
T2B10 C
T2B11 A
T2C01 A
T2C02 B
T2C03 C
T2C04 A
T2C05 D
T2C06 D
T2C07 D
T2C08 C
T2C09 C
T2C10 D
T2C11 A
T2D01 A
T2D02 D
T2D03 A
T2D04 B
T2D05 D
T2D06 B
T2D07 B
T2D08 C
T2D09 C
T2D10 A
T2D11 D
T2E01 A
T2E02 B
T2E03 C
T2E04 D
T2E05 A
T2E06 B
T2E07 B
T2E08 A
T2E09 B
T2E10 C
T2E11 D
T3A01 B
T3A02 A
T3A03 B
T3A04 C
T3A05 A
T3A06 C
T3A07 C
T3A08 C
T3A09 B
T3A10 A
T3A11 C
T3B01 C
T3B02 A
T3B03 D
T3B04 B
T3B05 A
T3B06 A
T3B07 C
T3B08 B
T3B09 D
T3B10 B
T3B11 C
T3C01 D
T3C02 C
T3C03 A
T3C04 D
T3C05 A
T3C06 C
T3C07 B
T3C08 D
T3C09 B
T3C10 A
T3C11 C
T4A01 C
T4A02 D
T4A03 B
T4A04 D
T4A05 C
T4A06 D
T4A07 B
T4A08 B
T4A09 A
T4A10 A
T4A11 B
T4B01 C
T4B02 A
T4B03 A
T4B04 A
T4B05 C
T4B06 A
T4B07 B
T4B08 C
T4B09 D
T4B10 C
T4B11 B
T4C01 B
T4C02 A
T4C03 A
T4C04 D
T4C05 B
T4C06 C
T4C07 B
T4C08 A
T4C09 B
T4C10 A
ELEMENT 2—TECHNICIAN CLASS EXAMINATION QUESTION POOL 483
T4C11 C
T4D01 C
T4D02 A
T4D03 B
T4D04 C
T4D05 D
T4D06 B
T4D07 B
T4D08 C
T4D09 A
T4D10 C
T4D11 D
T5A01 B
T5A02 C
T5A03 C
T5A04 C
T5A05 D
T5A06 B
T5A07 A
T5A08 C
T5A09 A
T5A10 C
T5A11 D
T5B01 D
T5B02 B
T5B03 C
T5B04 D
T5B05 D
T5B06 B
T5B07 D
T5B08 A
T5B09 D
T5B10 A
T5B11 C
T5C01 C
T5C02 B
T5C03 C
T5C04 C
T5C05 B
T5C06 B
T5C07 C
T5C08 B
T5C09 A
T5C10 A
T5C11 B
T6A01 C
T6A02 A
T6A03 D
T6A04 A
T6A05 D
T6A06 A
T6A07 A
T6A08 D
T6A09 C
T6A10 A
T6A11 A
T6B01 A
T6B02 A
T6B03 D
T6B04 D
T6B05 D
T6B06 A
T6B07 C
T6B08 C
T6B09 A
T6B10 B
T6B11 A
T7A01 B
T7A02 D
T7A03 A
T7A04 A
T7A05 B
T7A06 D
T7A07 C
T7A08 B
T7A09 D
T7A10 A
T7A11 B
T7B01 D
T7B02 D
T7B03 A
T7B04 C
T7B05 D
T7B06 D
T7B07 C
T7B08 A
T7B09 A
T7B10 C
T7B11 D
T8A01 C
T8A02 C
T8A03 D
T8A04 C
T8A05 C
T8A06 B
T8A07 B
T8A08 C
T8A09 C
T8A10 B
T8A11 C
T8B01 B
T8B02 D
T8B03 A
T8B04 C
T8B05 A
T8B06 D
T8B07 A
T8B08 D
T8B09 C
T9A01 D
T9A02 B
T9A03 C
T9A04 A
T9A05 C
484 APPENDIX A
T9A06 A
T9A07 B
T9A08 A
T9A09 B
T9A10 A
T9A11 D
T9B01 C
T9B02 A
T9B03 B
T9B04 A
T9B05 D
T9B06 B
T9B07 D
T9B08 D
T9B09 D
T9B10 A
T9B11 B
T0A01 B
T0A02 D
T0A03 C
T0A04 C
T0A05 D
T0A06 A
T0A07 D
T0A08 A
T0A09 C
T0A10 D
T0B01 C
T0B02 A
T0B03 D
T0B04 A
T0B05 B
T0B06 A
T0B07 D
T0B08 C
T0B09 C
T0B10 A
T0B11 D
T0C01 A
T0C02 D
T0C03 B
T0C04 A
T0C05 A
T0C06 B
T0C07 B
T0C08 C
T0C09 C
T0C10 B
There are two ways to determine whether your station’s radio fre-
quency signal radiation is within the maximum permissible expo-
sure (MPE) guidelines established by the FCC for controlled and
uncontrolled environments. One way is direct measurement of the RF
fields. The second way is through prediction using various antenna
modeling, equations, and calculation methods described in the FCC’s
OET Bulletin 65 and Supplement B.
In general, most amateurs will not have access to the appropriate cali-
brated equipment to make precise field strength/power density measure-
ments. The field-strength meters in common use by amateur operators
and inexpensive, hand-peld field-strength meters do not provide the
accuracy necessary for reliable measurements, especially when different
frequencies may be encountered at a given measurement location. It is
more practical for amateurs to determine their pep output power at the
antenna and then look up the required distances to the controlled/uncon-
trolled environments using the following tables, which were developed
using the prediction equations supplied by the FCC.
The FCC has determined that radio operators and their families are
in the controlled environment and your neighbors and passers-by are
in the uncontrolled environment. The estimated minimum compliance
distances are in meters from the transmitting antenna to either the
occupational/controlled exposure environment (Con) or the general
population/uncontrolled exposure environment (Unc) using typical
The W5YI RF Safety Tables*
B
485
A P P E N D I X
*Courtesy of the W5YI Group and Master Publishing Inc.
Copyright 2001 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click Here for Terms of Use.
486 APPENDIX B
antenna gains for the amateur service and assuming 100% duty cycle
and maximum surface reflection. Therefore, these charts represent the
worst-case scenario. They do not take into consideration compliance
distance reductions that would be caused by:
1. Feed line losses, which reduce power output at the antenna, espe-
cially at the VHF and higher frequency levels.
2. Duty cycle caused by the emission type. The emission-type factor
accounts for the fact that, for some modulated emission types that
have a nonconstant envelope, the pep can be considerably larger than
the average power. Multiply the distances by 0.4 if you are using CW
Morse telegraphy, and by 0.2 for two-way single sideband (SSB) voice.
There is no reduction for FM.
3. Duty cycle caused by on/off time or time averaging. The RF safety
guidelines permit RF exposures to be averaged over certain periods of
time with the average not to exceed the limit for continuous exposure.
The averaging time for occupational/controlled exposure is 6 minutes,
while the averaging time for general population/uncontrolled expo-
sure is 30 minutes. For example, if the relevant time interval for time-
averaging is 6 minutes, an amateur could be exposed to two times the
applicable power density limit for three minutes as long as he or she
were not exposed at all for the preceding or following three minutes.
A routine evaluation is not required for vehicular mobile or hand-
held transceiver stations. Amateur radio operators should be aware,
however, of the potential for exposure to RF electromagnetic fields
from these stations, and take measures (such as reducing transmitting
power to the minimum necessary, positioning the radiating antenna as
far from humans as practical, and limiting continuous transmitting
time) to protect themselves and the occupants of their vehicles.
Amateur radio operators should also be aware that the new FCC
radio-frequency safety regulations address exposure to people—and
not the strength of the signal. Amateurs may exceed the MPE limits as
long as no one is exposed to the radiation.
How to read the chart: If you are radiating 500 watts from your 10-
meter dipole (about 3 dB gain), there must be at least 4.5 meters (about
15 feet) between you (and your family) and the antenna—and a distance
of 10 meters (about 33 feet) between the antenna and your neighbors.
THE W5YI RF SAFETY TABLES 487
TABLE B.1 Amateur Radio Frequency Bands
Freq.
(MF/HF) Antenna Peak envelope power (watts)

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
An electronics engineer and college instructor, Joe Mama
has been an avid ham radio operator for more than 40 years.
He holds the Advanced Class License and the FCC General
Radiotelephone Operator’s License.





Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia

    Donate
    Create account
    Log in

Contents

    (Top)
    History
    Introduction
    Complex impedance
    Complex voltage and current
    Device examples
    Generalised s-plane impedance
    Resistance vs reactance
    Combining impedances
    Measurement
    Variable impedance
    See also
    Notes
    References
    External links

Electrical impedance

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Tools

Appearance
Birthday mode (Baby Globe)

    Disabled
    Enabled
    Learn more about Birthday mode

Text

    Small
    Standard
    Large

Width

    Standard
    Wide

Color (beta)

    Automatic
    Light
    Dark

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Electromagnetism
Solenoid

    Electricity Magnetism Optics History Computational Textbooks Phenomena

Electrostatics

Magnetostatics

Electrodynamics

Electrical network

    Alternating current Capacitance Current density Direct current Electric current Electric power Electrolysis Electromotive force Impedance Inductance Joule heating Kirchhoff's laws Network analysis Ohm's law Parallel circuit Resistance Resonant cavities Series circuit Voltage Watt Waveguides

Magnetic circuit

Covariant formulation

Scientists

    vte

In electrical engineering, impedance is the opposition to alternating current presented by the combined effect of resistance and reactance in a circuit.[1]

Quantitatively, the impedance of a two-terminal circuit element is the ratio of the complex representation of the sinusoidal voltage between its terminals, to the complex representation of the current flowing through it.[2] In general, it depends upon the frequency of the sinusoidal voltage.

Impedance extends the concept of resistance to alternating current (AC) circuits, and possesses both magnitude and phase, unlike resistance, which has only magnitude.

Impedance can be represented as a complex number, with the same units as resistance, for which the SI unit is the ohm (Ω). Its symbol is usually Z, and it may be represented by writing its magnitude and phase in the polar form |Z|∠θ. However, Cartesian complex number representation is often more powerful for circuit analysis purposes.

The notion of impedance is useful for performing AC analysis of electrical networks, because it allows relating sinusoidal voltages and currents by a simple linear law. In multiple port networks, the two-terminal definition of impedance is inadequate, but the complex voltages at the ports and the currents flowing through them are still linearly related by the impedance matrix.[3]

The reciprocal of impedance is admittance, whose SI unit is the siemens.

Instruments used to measure the electrical impedance are called impedance analyzers.
History

Perhaps the earliest use of complex numbers in circuit analysis was by Johann Victor Wietlisbach in 1879 in analysing the Maxwell bridge. Wietlisbach avoided using differential equations by expressing AC currents and voltages as exponential functions with imaginary exponents (see § Validity of complex representation). Wietlisbach found the required voltage was given by multiplying the current by a complex number (impedance), although he did not identify this as a general parameter in its own right.[4]

The term impedance was coined by Oliver Heaviside in July 1886.[5][6] Heaviside recognised that the "resistance operator" (impedance) in his operational calculus was a complex number. In 1887 he showed that there was an AC equivalent to Ohm's law.[7]

Arthur Kennelly published an influential paper on impedance in 1893. Kennelly arrived at a complex number representation in a rather more direct way than using imaginary exponential functions. Kennelly followed the graphical representation of impedance (showing resistance, reactance, and impedance as the lengths of the sides of a right angle triangle) developed by John Ambrose Fleming in 1889. Impedances could thus be added vectorially. Kennelly realised that this graphical representation of impedance was directly analogous to graphical representation of complex numbers (Argand diagram). Problems in impedance calculation could thus be approached algebraically with a complex number representation.[8][9] Later that same year, Kennelly's work was generalised to all AC circuits by Charles Proteus Steinmetz. Steinmetz not only represented impedances by complex numbers but also voltages and currents. Unlike Kennelly, Steinmetz was thus able to express AC equivalents of DC laws such as Ohm's and Kirchhoff's laws.[10] Steinmetz's work was highly influential in spreading the technique amongst engineers.[11]
Introduction

In addition to resistance as seen in DC circuits, impedance in AC circuits includes the effects of the induction of voltages in conductors by the magnetic fields (inductance), and the electrostatic storage of charge induced by voltages between conductors (capacitance). The impedance caused by these two effects is collectively referred to as reactance and forms the imaginary part of complex impedance whereas resistance forms the real part.
Complex impedance
A graphical representation of the complex impedance plane

The impedance of a two-terminal circuit element is represented as a complex quantity Z {\displaystyle Z}. The polar form conveniently captures both magnitude and phase characteristics as

      Z = | Z | e j arg ⁡ ( Z ) {\displaystyle \ Z=|Z|e^{j\arg(Z)}}

where the magnitude | Z | {\displaystyle |Z|} represents the ratio of the voltage difference amplitude to the amplitude of the current, while the argument arg ⁡ ( Z ) {\displaystyle \arg(Z)} (commonly given the symbol θ {\displaystyle \theta }) gives the phase difference between voltage and current. In electrical engineering, the letter i {\displaystyle i} is used for electric current, so the imaginary unit is instead represented by the letter j {\displaystyle j}.[12]: 21 

In Cartesian form, impedance is defined as

      Z = R + j X {\displaystyle \ Z=R+jX}

where the real part of impedance is the resistance R and the imaginary part is the reactance X.

Where it is needed to add or subtract impedances, the cartesian form is more convenient; but when quantities are multiplied or divided, the calculation becomes simpler if the polar form is used. A circuit calculation, such as finding the total impedance of two impedances in parallel, may require conversion between forms several times during the calculation. Conversion between the forms follows the normal conversion rules of complex numbers.
Complex voltage and current
Generalized impedances in a circuit can be drawn with the same symbol as a resistor (US ANSI or DIN Euro) or with a labeled box.

To simplify calculations, sinusoidal voltage and current waves are commonly represented as complex-valued functions of time denoted as V {\displaystyle V} and I {\displaystyle I}.[13][14]

    V = | V | e j ( ω t + ϕ V ) , I = | I | e j ( ω t + ϕ I ) . {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}V&=|V|e^{j(\omega t+\phi _{V})},\\I&=|I|e^{j(\omega t+\phi _{I})}.\end{aligned}}}

The impedance of a bipolar circuit is defined as the ratio of these quantities:

    Z = V I = | V | | I | e j ( ϕ V − ϕ I ) . {\displaystyle Z={\frac {V}{I}}={\frac {|V|}{|I|}}e^{j(\phi _{V}-\phi _{I})}.}

Hence, denoting θ = ϕ V − ϕ I {\displaystyle \theta =\phi _{V}-\phi _{I}}, we have

    | V | = | I | | Z | , ϕ V = ϕ I + θ . {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}|V|&=|I||Z|,\\\phi _{V}&=\phi _{I}+\theta .\end{aligned}}}

The magnitude equation is the familiar Ohm's law applied to the voltage and current amplitudes, while the second equation defines the phase relationship.
Validity of complex representation

This representation using complex exponentials may be justified by noting that (by Euler's formula):

      cos ⁡ ( ω t + ϕ ) = 1 2 [ e j ( ω t + ϕ ) + e − j ( ω t + ϕ ) ] {\displaystyle \ \cos(\omega t+\phi )={\frac {1}{2}}{\Big [}e^{j(\omega t+\phi )}+e^{-j(\omega t+\phi )}{\Big ]}}

The real-valued sinusoidal function representing either voltage or current may be broken into two complex-valued functions. By the principle of superposition, we may analyse the behaviour of the sinusoid on the left-hand side by analysing the behaviour of the two complex terms on the right-hand side. Given the symmetry, we only need to perform the analysis for one right-hand term. The results are identical for the other. At the end of any calculation, we may return to real-valued sinusoids by further noting that

      cos ⁡ ( ω t + ϕ ) = Re ⁡ { e j ( ω t + ϕ ) } {\displaystyle \ \cos(\omega t+\phi )=\operatorname {Re} {\Big \{}e^{j(\omega t+\phi )}{\Big \}}}

Ohm's law
An AC supply applying a voltage V {\displaystyle V}, across a load Z {\displaystyle Z}, driving a current I {\displaystyle I}
Main article: Ohm's law

The meaning of electrical impedance can be understood by substituting it into Ohm's law.[15][16] Assuming a two-terminal circuit element with impedance Z {\displaystyle Z} is driven by a sinusoidal voltage or current as above, there holds

      V = I Z = I | Z | e j arg ⁡ ( Z ) {\displaystyle \ V=IZ=I|Z|e^{j\arg(Z)}}

The magnitude of the impedance | Z | {\displaystyle |Z|} acts just like resistance, giving the drop in voltage amplitude across an impedance Z {\displaystyle Z} for a given current I {\displaystyle I}. The phase factor tells us that the current lags the voltage by a phase θ = arg ⁡ ( Z ) {\displaystyle \theta =\arg(Z)} (i.e., in the time domain, the current signal is shifted θ 2 π T {\textstyle {\frac {\theta }{2\pi }}T} later with respect to the voltage signal).

Just as impedance extends Ohm's law to cover AC circuits, other results from DC circuit analysis, such as voltage division, current division, Thévenin's theorem and Norton's theorem, can also be extended to AC circuits by replacing resistance with impedance.
Phasors
Main article: Phasor
Further information: Analytic representation

A phasor is represented by a constant complex number, usually expressed in exponential form, representing the complex amplitude (magnitude and phase) of a sinusoidal function of time. Phasors are used by electrical engineers to simplify computations involving sinusoids (such as in AC circuits[12]: 53 ), where they can often reduce a differential equation problem to an algebraic one.

The impedance of a circuit element can be defined as the ratio of the phasor voltage across the element to the phasor current through the element, as determined by the relative amplitudes and phases of the voltage and current. This is identical to the definition from Ohm's law given above, recognising that the factors of e j ω t {\displaystyle e^{j\omega t}} cancel.
Device examples
Resistor
The phase angles in the equations for the impedance of capacitors and inductors indicate that the voltage across a capacitor lags the current through it by a phase of π / 2 {\displaystyle \pi /2}, while the voltage across an inductor leads the current through it by π / 2 {\displaystyle \pi /2}. The identical voltage and current amplitudes indicate that the magnitude of the impedance is equal to one.

The impedance of an ideal resistor is purely real and is called resistive impedance:

      Z R = R {\displaystyle \ Z_{R}=R}

In this case, the voltage and current waveforms are proportional and in phase.
Inductor and capacitor (in the steady state)

Ideal inductors and capacitors have a purely imaginary reactive impedance:

the impedance of inductors increases as frequency increases;

    Z L = j ω L {\displaystyle Z_{L}=j\omega L}

the impedance of capacitors decreases as frequency increases;

    Z C = 1 j ω C {\displaystyle Z_{C}={\frac {1}{j\omega C}}}

In both cases, for an applied sinusoidal voltage, the resulting current is also sinusoidal, but in quadrature, 90 degrees out of phase with the voltage. However, the phases have opposite signs: in an inductor, the current is lagging; in a capacitor the current is leading.

Note the following identities for the imaginary unit and its reciprocal:

    j ≡ cos ⁡ ( π 2 ) + j sin ⁡ ( π 2 ) ≡ e j π 2 1 j ≡ − j ≡ cos ⁡ ( − π 2 ) + j sin ⁡ ( − π 2 ) ≡ e j ( − π 2 ) {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}j&\equiv \cos {\left({\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}+j\sin {\left({\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}\equiv e^{j{\frac {\pi }{2}}}\\{\frac {1}{j}}\equiv -j&\equiv \cos {\left(-{\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}+j\sin {\left(-{\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}\equiv e^{j\left(-{\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}\end{aligned}}}

Thus the inductor and capacitor impedance equations can be rewritten in polar form:

    Z L = ω L e j π 2 Z C = 1 ω C e j ( − π 2 ) {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}Z_{L}&=\omega Le^{j{\frac {\pi }{2}}}\\Z_{C}&={\frac {1}{\omega C}}e^{j\left(-{\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}\end{aligned}}}

The magnitude gives the change in voltage amplitude for a given current amplitude through the impedance, while the exponential factors give the phase relationship.
Deriving the device-specific impedances

What follows below is a derivation of impedance for each of the three basic circuit elements: the resistor, the capacitor, and the inductor. Although the idea can be extended to define the relationship between the voltage and current of any arbitrary signal, these derivations assume sinusoidal signals. In fact, this applies to any arbitrary periodic signals, because these can be approximated as a sum of sinusoids through Fourier analysis.
Resistor

For a resistor, there is the relation

    v R ( t ) = i R ( t ) R {\displaystyle v_{\text{R}}{\mathord {\left(t\right)}}=i_{\text{R}}{\mathord {\left(t\right)}}R}

which is Ohm's law.

Considering the voltage signal to be

    v R ( t ) = V p sin ⁡ ( ω t ) {\displaystyle v_{\text{R}}(t)=V_{p}\sin(\omega t)}

it follows that

    v R ( t ) i R ( t ) = V p sin ⁡ ( ω t ) I p sin ⁡ ( ω t ) = R {\displaystyle {\frac {v_{\text{R}}{\mathord {\left(t\right)}}}{i_{\text{R}}{\mathord {\left(t\right)}}}}={\frac {V_{p}\sin(\omega t)}{I_{p}\sin {\mathord {\left(\omega t\right)}}}}=R}

This says that the ratio of AC voltage amplitude to alternating current (AC) amplitude across a resistor is R {\displaystyle R}, and that the AC voltage leads the current across a resistor by 0 degrees.

This result is commonly expressed as

    Z resistor = R {\displaystyle Z_{\text{resistor}}=R}

Capacitor (in the steady state)

For a capacitor, there is the relation:

    i C ( t ) = C d v C ( t ) d t {\displaystyle i_{\text{C}}(t)=C{\frac {\mathrm {d} v_{\text{C}}(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}}

Considering the voltage signal to be

    v C ( t ) = V p e j ω t {\displaystyle v_{\text{C}}(t)=V_{p}e^{j\omega t}}

it follows that

    d v C ( t ) d t = j ω V p e j ω t {\displaystyle {\frac {\mathrm {d} v_{\text{C}}(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}=j\omega V_{p}e^{j\omega t}}

and thus, as previously,

    Z capacitor = v C ( t ) i C ( t ) = 1 j ω C . {\displaystyle Z_{\text{capacitor}}={\frac {v_{\text{C}}{\mathord {\left(t\right)}}}{i_{\text{C}}{\mathord {\left(t\right)}}}}={\frac {1}{j\omega C}}.}

Conversely, if the current through the circuit is assumed to be sinusoidal, its complex representation being

    i C ( t ) = I p e j ω t {\displaystyle i_{\text{C}}(t)=I_{p}e^{j\omega t}}

then integrating the differential equation

    i C ( t ) = C d v C ( t ) d t {\displaystyle i_{\text{C}}(t)=C{\frac {\mathrm {d} v_{\text{C}}(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}}

leads to

    v C ( t ) = 1 j ω C I p e j ω t + Const. = 1 j ω C i C ( t ) + Const. {\displaystyle v_{C}(t)={\frac {1}{j\omega C}}I_{p}e^{j\omega t}+{\text{Const.}}={\frac {1}{j\omega C}}i_{C}(t)+{\text{Const.}}}

The Const term represents a fixed potential bias superimposed to the AC sinusoidal potential, that plays no role in AC analysis. For this purpose, this term can be assumed to be 0, hence again the impedance

    Z capacitor = 1 j ω C . {\displaystyle Z_{\text{capacitor}}={\frac {1}{j\omega C}}.}

Inductor (in the steady state)

For the inductor, we have the relation (from Faraday's law):

    v L ( t ) = L d i L ( t ) d t {\displaystyle v_{\text{L}}(t)=L{\frac {\mathrm {d} i_{\text{L}}(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}}

This time, considering the current signal to be:

    i L ( t ) = I p sin ⁡ ( ω t ) {\displaystyle i_{\text{L}}(t)=I_{p}\sin(\omega t)}

it follows that:

    d i L ( t ) d t = ω I p cos ⁡ ( ω t ) {\displaystyle {\frac {\mathrm {d} i_{\text{L}}(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}=\omega I_{p}\cos {\mathord {\left(\omega t\right)}}}

This result is commonly expressed in polar form as

    Z inductor = ω L e j π 2 {\displaystyle Z_{\text{inductor}}=\omega Le^{j{\frac {\pi }{2}}}}

or, using Euler's formula, as

    Z inductor = j ω L {\displaystyle Z_{\text{inductor}}=j\omega L}

As in the case of capacitors, it is also possible to derive this formula directly from the complex representations of the voltages and currents, or by assuming a sinusoidal voltage between the two poles of the inductor. In the latter case, integrating the differential equation above leads to a constant term for the current, that represents a fixed DC bias flowing through the inductor. This is set to zero because AC analysis using frequency domain impedance considers one frequency at a time and DC represents a separate frequency of zero hertz in this context.
Generalised s-plane impedance

The impedance of capacitors and inductors were defined above in terms of j ω {\displaystyle j\omega }, but this simplification can strictly be applied only to circuits that are driven with steady state AC and DC signals, a condition called the steady state. The mere act of turning a signal source ON or OFF violates this steady state condition. To allow evaluation of the transient response in addition to the steady state of a circuit, the concept of impedance can be extended to a circuit energised with any arbitrary signal by using complex frequency s = σ + j ω {\displaystyle s{=}\sigma {+}j\omega } instead of just j ω {\displaystyle j\omega }. Signals are expressed in terms of complex frequency by taking the Laplace transform of the time domain expression of the signal. The impedance of the basic circuit elements in this more general notation is as follows:
Element 	Impedance expression
Resistor 	R {\displaystyle R\,}
Inductor 	s L {\displaystyle sL\,}
Capacitor 	1 s C {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{sC}}\,}

For a steady state signal, s {\displaystyle s} simplifies to j ω {\displaystyle j\omega }. This further simplifies to s = 0 {\displaystyle s{=}0} for a DC-only circuit, in which case every inductor will behave as a short circuit and every capacitor will behave as an open circuit.
Formal derivation

The impedance Z {\displaystyle Z} of an electrical component is defined as the ratio between the Laplace transforms of the voltage over it and the current through it, i.e.

    Z ( s ) = L { v ( t ) } L { i ( t ) } = V ( s ) I ( s ) (general impedance) {\displaystyle Z(s)={\frac {{\mathcal {L}}\{v(t)\}}{{\mathcal {L}}\{i(t)\}}}={\frac {V(s)}{I(s)}}\qquad {\text{(general impedance)}}}

where s = σ + j ω {\displaystyle s=\sigma +j\omega } is the complex Laplace parameter.
Inductor

Using the current–voltage relationship of an inductor [ v ( t ) = L d i ( t ) d t ] {\displaystyle [v(t){=}L{\tfrac {\mathrm {d} i(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}]}, the Laplace transform of its voltage is:

    L { v ( t ) } = L { L d i ( t ) d t } = s L L { i ( t ) } . {\displaystyle {\mathcal {L}}\{v(t)\}={\mathcal {L}}\{L\,{\tfrac {\mathrm {d} i(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}\}=sL\,{\mathcal {L}}\{i(t)\}\,.}

Rearranging so that L { v ( t ) } {\displaystyle {\mathcal {L}}\{v(t)\}} is divided by L { i ( t ) } {\displaystyle {\mathcal {L}}\{i(t)\}} provides the inductor's impedance: Z L ( s ) = s L {\displaystyle Z_{L}(s){=}sL}.
Capacitor

Using the current–voltage relationship of a capacitor [ i ( t ) = C d v ( t ) d t ] {\displaystyle [i(t){=}C{\tfrac {\mathrm {d} v(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}]}, the Laplace transform of its current is:

    L { i ( t ) } = L { C d v ( t ) d t } = s C L { v ( t ) } . {\displaystyle {\mathcal {L}}\{i(t)\}={\mathcal {L}}\{C\,{\tfrac {\mathrm {d} v(t)}{\mathrm {d} t}}\}=sC\,{\mathcal {L}}\{v(t)\}\,.}

Rearranging so that L { v ( t ) } {\displaystyle {\mathcal {L}}\{v(t)\}} is divided by L { i ( t ) } {\displaystyle {\mathcal {L}}\{i(t)\}} provides the capacitor's impedance: Z C ( s ) = 1 s C {\displaystyle Z_{C}(s){=}{\tfrac {1}{sC}}}.
Relation to phasors

In the phasor regime (steady state, meaning all signals are represented mathematically as simple complex exponentials v ( t ) = V ^ e j ω t {\displaystyle v(t)={\hat {V}}\,e^{j\omega t}} and i ( t ) = I ^ e j ω t {\displaystyle i(t)={\hat {I}}\,e^{j\omega t}} oscillating at a common frequency ω {\displaystyle \omega }), impedance can simply be calculated as the voltage-to-current ratio, in which the common time-dependent factor cancels out:

    Z ( ω ) = v ( t ) i ( t ) = V ^ e j ω t I ^ e j ω t = V ^ I ^ (phasor-regime impedance) {\displaystyle Z(\omega )={\frac {v(t)}{i(t)}}={\frac {{\hat {V}}\,e^{j\omega t}}{{\hat {I}}\,e^{j\omega t}}}={\frac {\hat {V}}{\hat {I}}}\qquad {\text{(phasor-regime impedance)}}}

The phasor domain is sometimes dubbed the frequency domain, although it lacks one of the dimensions of the Laplace parameter.[17] For steady-state, the polar form of the complex impedance relates the amplitude and phase of the voltage and current. In particular:

    The magnitude of the complex impedance is the ratio of the voltage amplitude to the current amplitude;
    The phase of the complex impedance is the phase shift by which the current lags the voltage.

These two relationships hold even after taking the real part of the complex exponentials (see phasors), which is the part of the signal one actually measures in real-life circuits.
Resistance vs reactance

Resistance and reactance together determine the magnitude and phase of the impedance through the following relations:

    | Z | = Z Z ∗ = R 2 + X 2 θ = arctan ⁡ ( X R ) {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}|Z|&={\sqrt {ZZ^{*}}}={\sqrt {R^{2}+X^{2}}}\\\theta &=\arctan {\left({\frac {X}{R}}\right)}\end{aligned}}}

In many applications, the relative phase of the voltage and current is not critical so only the magnitude of the impedance is significant.
Resistance
Main article: Electrical resistance

Resistance R {\displaystyle R} is the real part of impedance; a device with a purely resistive impedance exhibits no phase shift between the voltage and current.

      R = | Z | cos ⁡ θ {\displaystyle \ R=|Z|\cos {\theta }\quad }

Reactance
Main article: Electrical reactance

Reactance X {\displaystyle X} is the imaginary part of the impedance; a component with a finite reactance induces a phase shift θ {\displaystyle \theta } between the voltage across it and the current through it.

      X = | Z | sin ⁡ θ {\displaystyle \ X=|Z|\sin {\theta }\quad }

A purely reactive component is distinguished by the sinusoidal voltage across the component being in quadrature with the sinusoidal current through the component. This implies that the component alternately absorbs energy from the circuit and then returns energy to the circuit. A pure reactance does not dissipate any power.
Capacitive reactance
Main article: Capacitance

A capacitor has a purely reactive impedance that is inversely proportional to the signal frequency. A capacitor consists of two conductors separated by an insulator, also known as a dielectric.

    X C = − 1       ω   C   = − 1       2 π   f   C     . {\displaystyle X_{\mathsf {C}}={\frac {-1\ ~}{\ \omega \ C\ }}={\frac {-1\ ~}{\ 2\pi \ f\ C\ }}~.}

The minus sign indicates that the imaginary part of the impedance is negative.

At low frequencies, a capacitor approaches an open circuit so no current flows through it.

A DC voltage applied across a capacitor causes charge to accumulate on one side; the electric field due to the accumulated charge is the source of the opposition to the current. When the potential associated with the charge exactly balances the applied voltage, the current goes to zero.

Driven by an AC supply, a capacitor accumulates only a limited charge before the potential difference changes sign and the charge dissipates. The higher the frequency, the less charge accumulates and the smaller the opposition to the current.
Inductive reactance
Main article: Inductance

Inductive reactance X L {\displaystyle X_{L}} is proportional to the signal frequency f {\displaystyle f} and the inductance L {\displaystyle L}.

    X L = ω L = 2 π f L {\displaystyle X_{L}=\omega L=2\pi fL\quad }

An inductor consists of a coiled conductor. Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction gives the back emf E {\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}} (voltage opposing current) due to a rate-of-change of magnetic flux density B {\displaystyle B} through a current loop.

    E = − d Φ B d t {\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}=-{{d\Phi _{B}} \over dt}\quad }

For an inductor consisting of a coil with N {\displaystyle N} loops this gives:

    E = − N d Φ B d t {\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}=-N{d\Phi _{B} \over dt}\quad }

The back-emf is the source of the opposition to current flow. A constant direct current has a zero rate-of-change, and sees an inductor as a short-circuit (it is typically made from a material with a low resistivity). An alternating current has a time-averaged rate-of-change that is proportional to frequency, this causes the increase in inductive reactance with frequency.
Total reactance

The total reactance is given by

    X = X L + X C {\displaystyle {X=X_{L}+X_{C}}} ( X C {\displaystyle X_{C}} is negative)

so that the total impedance is

      Z = R + j X {\displaystyle \ Z=R+jX}

Combining impedances
Main article: Series and parallel circuits

The total impedance of many simple networks of components can be calculated using the rules for combining impedances in series and parallel. The rules are identical to those for combining resistances, except that the numbers in general are complex numbers. The general case, however, requires equivalent impedance transforms in addition to series and parallel.
Series combination

For components connected in series, the current through each circuit element is the same; the total impedance is the sum of the component impedances.

      Z eq = Z 1 + Z 2 + ⋯ + Z n {\displaystyle \ Z_{\text{eq}}=Z_{1}+Z_{2}+\cdots +Z_{n}\quad }

Or explicitly in real and imaginary terms:

      Z eq = R + j X = ( R 1 + R 2 + ⋯ + R n ) + j ( X 1 + X 2 + ⋯ + X n ) {\displaystyle \ Z_{\text{eq}}=R+jX=(R_{1}+R_{2}+\cdots +R_{n})+j(X_{1}+X_{2}+\cdots +X_{n})\quad }

Parallel combination

For components connected in parallel, the voltage across each circuit element is the same; the ratio of currents through any two elements is the inverse ratio of their impedances.

Hence the inverse total impedance is the sum of the inverses of the component impedances:

    1 Z eq = 1 Z 1 + 1 Z 2 + ⋯ + 1 Z n {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{Z_{\text{eq}}}}={\frac {1}{Z_{1}}}+{\frac {1}{Z_{2}}}+\cdots +{\frac {1}{Z_{n}}}}

or, when n = 2:

    1 Z eq = 1 Z 1 + 1 Z 2 = Z 1 + Z 2 Z 1 Z 2 {\displaystyle {\frac {1}{Z_{\text{eq}}}}={\frac {1}{Z_{1}}}+{\frac {1}{Z_{2}}}={\frac {Z_{1}+Z_{2}}{Z_{1}Z_{2}}}}
      Z eq = Z 1 Z 2 Z 1 + Z 2 {\displaystyle \ Z_{\text{eq}}={\frac {Z_{1}Z_{2}}{Z_{1}+Z_{2}}}}

The equivalent impedance Z eq {\displaystyle Z_{\text{eq}}} can be calculated in terms of the equivalent series resistance R eq {\displaystyle R_{\text{eq}}} and reactance X eq {\displaystyle X_{\text{eq}}}.[18]

    Z eq = R eq + j X eq R eq = ( X 1 R 2 + X 2 R 1 ) ( X 1 + X 2 ) + ( R 1 R 2 − X 1 X 2 ) ( R 1 + R 2 ) ( R 1 + R 2 ) 2 + ( X 1 + X 2 ) 2 X eq = ( X 1 R 2 + X 2 R 1 ) ( R 1 + R 2 ) − ( R 1 R 2 − X 1 X 2 ) ( X 1 + X 2 ) ( R 1 + R 2 ) 2 + ( X 1 + X 2 ) 2 {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}Z_{\text{eq}}&=R_{\text{eq}}+jX_{\text{eq}}\\R_{\text{eq}}&={\frac {(X_{1}R_{2}+X_{2}R_{1})(X_{1}+X_{2})+(R_{1}R_{2}-X_{1}X_{2})(R_{1}+R_{2})}{(R_{1}+R_{2})^{2}+(X_{1}+X_{2})^{2}}}\\X_{\text{eq}}&={\frac {(X_{1}R_{2}+X_{2}R_{1})(R_{1}+R_{2})-(R_{1}R_{2}-X_{1}X_{2})(X_{1}+X_{2})}{(R_{1}+R_{2})^{2}+(X_{1}+X_{2})^{2}}}\end{aligned}}}

Measurement

The measurement of the impedance of devices and transmission lines is a practical problem in radio technology and other fields. Measurements of impedance may be carried out at one frequency, or the variation of device impedance over a range of frequencies may be of interest. The impedance may be measured or displayed directly in ohms, or other values related to impedance may be displayed; for example, in a radio antenna, the standing wave ratio or reflection coefficient may be more useful than the impedance alone. The measurement of impedance requires the measurement of the magnitude of voltage and current, and the phase difference between them. Impedance is often measured by "bridge" methods, similar to the direct-current Wheatstone bridge; a calibrated reference impedance is adjusted to balance off the effect of the impedance of the device under test. Impedance measurement in power electronic devices may require simultaneous measurement and provision of power to the operating device.

The impedance of a device can be calculated by complex division of the voltage and current. The impedance of the device can be calculated by applying a sinusoidal voltage to the device in series with a resistor, and measuring the voltage across the resistor and across the device. Performing this measurement by sweeping the frequencies of the applied signal provides the impedance phase and magnitude.[19]

The use of an impulse response may be used in combination with the fast Fourier transform (FFT) to rapidly measure the electrical impedance of various electrical devices.[19]

The LCR meter measures a component's inductance (L), capacitance (C), and resistance (R); from these values, the impedance at any frequency can be calculated.
Example

Consider a parallel LC tank circuit. The complex impedance of the circuit is

    Z ( ω ) = j ω L 1 − ω 2 L C . {\displaystyle Z(\omega )={\frac {j\omega L}{1-\omega ^{2}LC}}.}

It is immediately seen that the value of 1 | Z | {\textstyle {1 \over |Z|}} is minimal (actually equal to 0 in this case) whenever

    ω 2 L C = 1. {\displaystyle \omega ^{2}LC=1.}

Therefore, the fundamental resonance angular frequency is

    ω = 1 L C . {\displaystyle \omega ={1 \over {\sqrt {LC}}}.}

Variable impedance
See also: Network analysis (electrical circuits) § Time-varying components

In general, neither impedance nor admittance can vary with time, since they are defined for complex exponentials in which −∞ < t < +∞. If the complex exponential voltage to current ratio changes over time or amplitude, the circuit element cannot be described using the frequency domain. However, many components and systems (e.g., varicaps that are used in radio tuners) may exhibit non-linear or time-varying voltage to current ratios that seem to be linear time-invariant (LTI) for small signals and over small observation windows, so they can be roughly described as if they had a time-varying impedance. This description is an approximation: Over large signal swings or wide observation windows, the voltage to current relationship will not be LTI and cannot be described by impedance.
See also



    Bioelectrical impedance analysis – Method for estimating body composition
    Characteristic impedance – Property of an electrical circuit
    Electrical characteristics of dynamic loudspeakers
    High impedance – Node in a circuit restricting current flow
    Immittance – Combined measure of impedance and admittance
    Impedance analyzer – Type of electronic test equipment
    Impedance bridging – Load measures the source's voltage without affecting it
    Impedance cardiography
    Impedance control – Controlling a mechanism's output force in response to input motion
    Impedance matching – Adjusting input/output impedances of an electrical circuit for some purpose
    Impedance microbiology – Measuring the microbial density in a sample via its electrical parameters
    Negative impedance converter – Active circuit which injects energy into circuits
    Resistance distance – Graph metric of electrical resistance between nodes
    Transmission line impedance
    Universal dielectric response


    Electrical resistance and conductance Electrical quantitiesAntennas (radio)




Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia

    Donate
    Create account
    Log in

Contents

    (Top)
    Comparison to resistance
    Capacitive reactance
    Inductive reactance
    Impedance
        Phase relationship
    See also
    References
    General references
    External links

Electrical reactance

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Tools

Appearance
Birthday mode (Baby Globe)

    Disabled
    Enabled
    Learn more about Birthday mode

Text

    Small
    Standard
    Large

Width

    Standard
    Wide

Color (beta)

    Automatic
    Light
    Dark

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Reactance (physics)" redirects here. For other uses, see Reactance.

In electrical circuits, reactance is the opposition presented to alternating current by inductance and capacitance.[1] It is measured in ohms.[1] Along with resistance, it is one of two elements of impedance; however, while both elements involve transfer of electrical energy, no dissipation of electrical energy as heat occurs in reactance; instead, the reactance stores energy until a quarter-cycle later when the energy is returned to the circuit. Greater reactance gives smaller current for the same applied voltage.

Reactance is used to compute amplitude and phase changes of sinusoidal alternating current going through a circuit element. Like resistance, reactance is measured in ohms, with positive values indicating inductive reactance and negative indicating capacitive reactance. It is denoted by the symbol ⁠ X {\displaystyle X}⁠. An ideal resistor has zero reactance, whereas ideal reactors have no shunt conductance and no series resistance. As frequency increases, inductive reactance increases and capacitive reactance decreases.
Comparison to resistance

Reactance is similar to resistance in that larger reactance leads to smaller currents for the same applied voltage. Furthermore, a circuit made entirely of elements that have only reactance (and no resistance) can be treated the same way as a circuit made entirely of resistances. These same techniques can also be used to combine elements with reactance with elements with resistance, but complex numbers are typically needed. This is treated below in the section on impedance.

There are several important differences between reactance and resistance, though. First, reactance changes the phase so that the current through the element is shifted by a quarter of a cycle relative to the phase of the voltage applied across the element. Second, power is not dissipated in a purely reactive element but is stored instead. Third, reactances can be negative so that they can 'cancel' each other out. Finally, the main circuit elements that have reactance (capacitors and inductors) have a frequency dependent reactance, unlike resistors which have the same resistance for all frequencies, at least in the ideal case.

The term reactance was first suggested by French engineer Édouard Hospitalier in L'Industrie Electrique on 10 May 1893. It was officially adopted by the American Institute of Electrical Engineers in May 1894.[2]
Capacitive reactance
Main article: Capacitance

A capacitor consists of two conductors separated by an insulator, also known as a dielectric.

Capacitive reactance is an opposition to the change of voltage across an element. Capacitive reactance X C {\displaystyle X_{C}} is inversely proportional to the signal frequency f {\displaystyle f} (or angular frequency ω {\displaystyle \omega }) and the capacitance ⁠ C {\displaystyle C}⁠.[3]

There are two choices in the literature for defining reactance for a capacitor. One is to use a uniform notion of reactance as the imaginary part of impedance, in which case the reactance of a capacitor is the negative number,[3][4][5] X C = − 1 ω C = − 1 2 π f C . {\displaystyle X_{C}=-{\frac {1}{\omega C}}=-{\frac {1}{2\pi fC}}.}

Another choice is to define capacitive reactance as a positive number,[6][7][8] X C = 1 ω C = 1 2 π f C . {\displaystyle X_{C}={\frac {1}{\omega C}}={\frac {1}{2\pi fC}}.}

In this case however one needs to remember to add a negative sign for the impedance of a capacitor, i.e. ⁠ Z c = − j X c {\displaystyle Z_{c}=-jX_{c}}⁠.

At ⁠ f = 0 {\displaystyle f=0}⁠, the magnitude of the capacitor's reactance is infinite, behaving like an open circuit (preventing any current from flowing through the dielectric). As frequency increases, the magnitude of reactance decreases, allowing more current to flow. As f {\displaystyle f} approaches ⁠ ∞ {\displaystyle \infty }⁠, the capacitor's reactance approaches ⁠ 0 {\displaystyle 0}⁠, behaving like a short circuit.

The application of a DC voltage across a capacitor causes positive charge to accumulate on one side and negative charge to accumulate on the other side; the electric field due to the accumulated charge is the source of the opposition to the current. When the potential associated with the charge exactly balances the applied voltage, the current goes to zero.

Driven by an AC supply (ideal AC current source), a capacitor will only accumulate a limited amount of charge before the potential difference changes polarity and the charge is returned to the source. The higher the frequency, the less charge will accumulate and the smaller the opposition to the current.
Inductive reactance
Main article: Inductance

Inductive reactance is a property exhibited by an inductor, and inductive reactance exists based on the fact that an electric current produces a magnetic field around it. In the context of an AC circuit (although this concept applies any time current is changing), this magnetic field is constantly changing as a result of current that oscillates back and forth. It is this change in magnetic field that induces another electric current to flow in the same wire – called counter-electromotive force (counter-EMF) – in a direction such as to oppose the flow of the current originally responsible for producing the magnetic field (known as Lenz's law). Hence, inductive reactance is an opposition to the change of current through an element.

For an ideal inductor in an AC circuit, the inhibitive effect on change in current flow results in a delay, or a phase shift, of the alternating current with respect to alternating voltage. Specifically, an ideal inductor (with no resistance) will cause the current to lag the voltage by a quarter cycle, or 90°.

In electric power systems, inductive reactance (and capacitive reactance, however inductive reactance is more common) can limit the power capacity of an AC transmission line, because power is not completely transferred when voltage and current are out-of-phase (detailed above). That is, current will flow for an out-of-phase system, however real power at certain times will not be transferred, because there will be points during which instantaneous current is positive while instantaneous voltage is negative, or vice versa, implying negative power transfer. Hence, real work is not performed when power transfer is "negative". However, current still flows even when a system is out-of-phase, which causes transmission lines to heat up due to current flow. Consequently, transmission lines can only heat up so much (or else they would physically sag too much, due to the heat expanding the metal transmission lines), so transmission line operators have a "ceiling" on the amount of current that can flow through a given line, and excessive inductive reactance can limit the power capacity of a line. Power providers utilize capacitors to shift the phase and minimize the losses, based on usage patterns.

Inductive reactance X L {\displaystyle X_{L}} is proportional to the sinusoidal signal frequency f {\displaystyle f} and the inductance ⁠ L {\displaystyle L}⁠, which depends on the physical shape of the inductor: X L = ω L = 2 π f L . {\displaystyle X_{L}=\omega L=2\pi fL.}

The average current flowing through an inductance L {\displaystyle L} in series with a sinusoidal AC voltage source of RMS amplitude A {\displaystyle A} and frequency f {\displaystyle f} is equal to: I L = A ω L = A 2 π f L . {\displaystyle I_{L}={A \over \omega L}={A \over 2\pi fL}.}

Because a square wave has multiple amplitudes at sinusoidal harmonics, the average current flowing through an inductance L {\displaystyle L} in series with a square wave AC voltage source of RMS amplitude A {\displaystyle A} and frequency f {\displaystyle f} is equal to: I L = A π 2 8 ω L = A π 16 f L , {\displaystyle I_{L}={A\pi ^{2} \over 8\omega L}={A\pi \over 16fL},} making it appear as if the inductive reactance to a square wave was about 19% smaller X L = 16 π f L {\displaystyle X_{L}={16 \over \pi }fL} than the reactance to the AC sine wave.

Any conductor of finite dimensions has inductance; the inductance is made larger by the multiple turns in an electromagnetic coil. Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction gives the counter-emf E {\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}} (voltage opposing current) due to a rate-of-change of magnetic flux density B {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {B}} through a current loop: E = − d Φ B d t . {\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}=-{{d\Phi _{B}} \over dt}.}

For an inductor consisting of a coil with N {\displaystyle N} loops this gives: E = − N d Φ B d t . {\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}=-N{d\Phi _{B} \over dt}.}

The counter-emf is the source of the opposition to current flow. A constant direct current has a zero rate-of-change, and sees an inductor as a short-circuit (it is typically made from a material with a low resistivity). An alternating current has a time-averaged rate-of-change that is proportional to frequency, this causes the increase in inductive reactance with frequency.
Impedance
Main article: Electrical impedance

Both reactance X {\displaystyle X} and resistance R {\displaystyle R} are components of impedance ⁠ Z {\displaystyle \mathbf {Z} }⁠: Z = R + j X , {\displaystyle \mathbf {Z} =R+\mathbf {j} X,} where:

    Z {\displaystyle \mathbf {Z} } is the complex impedance, measured in ohms;
    R {\displaystyle R} is the resistance, measured in ohms – it is the real part of the impedance R = Re ( Z ) {\displaystyle {R={\text{Re}}{(\mathbf {Z} )}}};
    X {\displaystyle X} is the reactance, measured in ohms – it is the imaginary part of the impedance X = Im ( Z ) {\displaystyle {X={\text{Im}}{(\mathbf {Z} )}}}; and
    j {\displaystyle \mathbf {j} } is the square root of negative one, usually represented by i {\displaystyle \mathbf {i} } in non-electrical formulas. j {\displaystyle \mathbf {j} } is used so as not to confuse the imaginary unit with current, commonly represented by ⁠ i {\displaystyle \mathbf {i} }⁠.

When both a capacitor and an inductor are placed in series in a circuit, their contributions to the total circuit impedance are opposite. Capacitive reactance X C {\displaystyle X_{C}} and inductive reactance X L {\displaystyle X_{L}} contribute to the total reactance X {\displaystyle X} as follows: X = X L + X C = ω L − 1 ω C , {\displaystyle {X=X_{L}+X_{C}=\omega L-{\frac {1}{\omega C}}},} where:

    X L {\displaystyle X_{L}} is the inductive reactance, measured in ohms;
    X C {\displaystyle X_{C}} is the capacitive reactance, measured in ohms; and
    ω {\displaystyle \omega } is the angular frequency, 2 π {\displaystyle 2\pi } times the frequency in Hz.

Hence:[5]

    if ⁠ X > 0 {\displaystyle \scriptstyle X>0}⁠, the total reactance is said to be inductive;
    if ⁠ X = 0 {\displaystyle \scriptstyle X=0}⁠, then the impedance is purely resistive;
    if ⁠ X < 0 {\displaystyle \scriptstyle X<0}⁠, the total reactance is said to be capacitive.

Note however that if X L {\displaystyle X_{L}} and X C {\displaystyle X_{C}} are assumed both positive by definition, then the intermediary formula changes to a difference:[7] X = X L − X C = ω L − 1 ω C , {\displaystyle {X=X_{L}-X_{C}=\omega L-{\frac {1}{\omega C}}},} but the ultimate value is the same.
Phase relationship

The phase of the voltage across a purely reactive device (i.e. with zero parasitic resistance) lags the current by π 2 {\displaystyle {\tfrac {\pi }{2}}} radians for a capacitive reactance and leads the current by π 2 {\displaystyle {\tfrac {\pi }{2}}} radians for an inductive reactance. Without knowledge of both the resistance and reactance the relationship between voltage and current cannot be determined.

The origin of the different signs for capacitive and inductive reactance is the phase factor e ± j π 2 {\displaystyle e^{\pm \mathbf {j} {\frac {\pi }{2}}}} in the impedance: Z C = 1 ω C e − j π 2 = j ( − 1 ω C ) = j X C , Z L = ω L e j π 2 = j ω L = j X L . {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mathbf {Z} _{C}&={1 \over \omega C}e^{-\mathbf {j} {\pi \over 2}}=\mathbf {j} \left({-{\frac {1}{\omega C}}}\right)=\mathbf {j} X_{C},\\\mathbf {Z} _{L}&=\omega Le^{\mathbf {j} {\pi \over 2}}=\mathbf {j} \omega L=\mathbf {j} X_{L}\quad .\end{aligned}}}

For a reactive component the sinusoidal voltage across the component is in quadrature (a π 2 {\displaystyle {\tfrac {\pi }{2}}} phase difference) with the sinusoidal current through the component. The component alternately absorbs energy from the circuit and then returns energy to the circuit, thus a pure reactance does not dissipate power.

An electric current is a flow of charged particles, such as electrons or ions, moving through an electrical conductor or space. It is defined as the net rate of flow of electric charge through a surface.[1]: 2 [2]: 622  The moving particles are called charge carriers, which may be one of several types of particles, depending on the conductor. In electric circuits the charge carriers are often electrons moving through a wire. In semiconductors they can be electrons or holes. In an electrolyte the charge carriers are ions, while in plasma, an ionized gas, they are ions and electrons.[3]

In the International System of Units (SI), electric current is expressed in units of ampere (sometimes called an "amp", symbol A), which is equivalent to one coulomb per second. The ampere is an SI base unit and electric current is a base quantity in the International System of Quantities (ISQ).[4]: 15  Electric current is also known as amperage and is measured using a device called an ammeter.[2]: 788 

Electric currents create magnetic fields, which are used in motors, generators, inductors, and transformers. In ordinary conductors, they cause Joule heating, which creates light in incandescent light bulbs. Time-varying currents emit electromagnetic waves, which are used in telecommunications to broadcast information.
Symbol

The conventional symbol for current is I, which originates from the French phrase intensité du courant (current intensity).[5][6] Current intensity is often referred to simply as current.[7] The I symbol was used by André-Marie Ampère, after whom the unit of electric current is named, in formulating Ampère's force law (1820).[8] The notation travelled from France to Great Britain, where it became standard, although at least one journal did not change from using C to I until 1896.[9]
Conventions
The electrons, the charge carriers in an electrical circuit, flow in the direction opposite that of the conventional electric current.
The symbol for a battery in a circuit diagram

The conventional direction of current, also known as conventional current,[10][11] is arbitrarily defined as the direction in which positive charges flow. In a conductive material, the moving charged particles that constitute the electric current are called charge carriers. In metals, which make up the wires and other conductors in most electrical circuits, the positively charged atomic nuclei of the atoms are held in a fixed position, and the negatively charged electrons are the charge carriers, free to move about in the metal. In other materials, notably the semiconductors, the charge carriers can be positive or negative, depending on the dopant used. Positive and negative charge carriers may even be present at the same time, as happens in an electrolyte in an electrochemical cell.

A flow of positive charges gives the same electric current, and has the same effect in a circuit, as an equal flow of negative charges in the opposite direction. Since current can be the flow of either positive or negative charges, or both, a convention is needed for the direction of current that is independent of the type of charge carriers. Negatively charged carriers, such as the electrons (the charge carriers in metal wires and many other electronic circuit components), therefore flow in the opposite direction of conventional current flow in an electrical circuit.[10][11]
Reference direction

A current in a wire or circuit element can flow in either of two directions. When defining a variable I {\displaystyle I} to represent the current, the direction representing positive current must be specified, usually by an arrow on the circuit schematic diagram.[12][13]: 13  This is called the reference direction of the current I {\displaystyle I}. When analyzing electrical circuits, the actual direction of current through a specific circuit element is usually unknown until the analysis is completed. Consequently, the reference directions of currents are often assigned arbitrarily. When the circuit is solved, a negative value for the current implies the actual direction of current through that circuit element is opposite that of the chosen reference direction.[a]: 29 
Ohm's law
Main article: Ohm's law

Ohm's law states that the current through a conductor between two points is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two points. Introducing the constant of proportionality, the resistance,[14] one arrives at the usual mathematical equation that describes this relationship:[15] I = V R , {\displaystyle I={\frac {V}{R}},}

where I is the current through the conductor in units of amperes, V is the potential difference measured across the conductor in units of volts, and R is the resistance of the conductor in units of ohms. More specifically, Ohm's law states that the R in this relation is constant, independent of the current.[16]
Alternating and direct current
See also: War of the currents

In alternating current (AC) systems, the movement of electric charge periodically reverses direction. AC is the form of electric power most commonly delivered to businesses and residences. The usual waveform of an AC power circuit is a sine wave, though certain applications use alternative waveforms, such as triangular or square waves. Audio and radio signals carried on electrical wires are also examples of alternating current. An important goal in these applications is recovery of information encoded (or modulated) onto the AC signal.

In contrast, direct current (DC) refers to a system in which electric charge moves in only one direction (sometimes called unidirectional flow). Direct current is produced by sources such as batteries, thermocouples, solar cells, and commutator-type electric machines of the dynamo type. Alternating current can also be converted to direct current through use of a rectifier. Direct current may flow in a conductor such as a wire, but can also flow through semiconductors, insulators, or even through a vacuum as in electron or ion beams. An old name for direct current was galvanic current.[17]
Occurrences

Natural observable examples of electric current include lightning, static electric discharge, and the solar wind, the source of the polar auroras.

Man-made occurrences of electric current include the flow of conduction electrons in metal wires such as the overhead power lines that deliver electrical energy across long distances and the smaller wires within electrical and electronic equipment. Eddy currents are electric currents that occur in conductors exposed to changing magnetic fields. Similarly, electric currents occur, particularly in the surface, of conductors exposed to electromagnetic waves. When oscillating electric currents flow at the correct voltages within radio antennas, radio waves are generated.

In electronics, other forms of electric current include the flow of electrons through resistors or through the vacuum in a vacuum tube, the flow of ions inside a battery, and the flow of holes within metals and semiconductors.

A biological example of current is the flow of ions in neurons and nerves, responsible for both thought and sensory perception.
Measurement

Current can be measured using an ammeter.

Electric current can be directly measured with a galvanometer, but this method involves breaking the electrical circuit, which is sometimes inconvenient.

Current can also be measured without breaking the circuit by detecting the magnetic field associated with the current. Devices, at the circuit level, use various techniques to measure current:

    Shunt resistors[18]
    Hall effect current sensor transducers
    Transformers (however DC cannot be measured)
    Magnetoresistive field sensors[19]
    Rogowski coils
    Current clamps

Resistive heating
Main article: Joule heating

Joule heating, also known as ohmic heating and resistive heating, is the process of power dissipation[20]: 36  by which the passage of an electric current through a conductor increases the internal energy of the conductor,[21]: 846  converting thermodynamic work into heat.[21]: 846, fn. 5  The phenomenon was first studied by James Prescott Joule in 1841. Joule immersed a length of wire in a fixed mass of water and measured the temperature rise due to a known current through the wire for a 30 minute period. By varying the current and the length of the wire he deduced that the heat produced was proportional to the square of the current multiplied by the electrical resistance of the wire.

P ∝ I 2 R . {\displaystyle P\propto I^{2}R.}

This relationship is known as Joule's Law.[20]: 36  The SI unit of energy was subsequently named the joule and given the symbol J.[4]: 20  The commonly known SI unit of power, the watt (symbol: W), is equivalent to one joule per second.[4]: 20 
Electromagnetism
Main article: Electromagnetism
Electromagnet
Main article: Electromagnet
A magnetic field is produced by an electric current in a solenoid.

In an electromagnet a coil of wires behaves like a magnet when an electric current flows through it. When the current is switched off, the coil loses its magnetism immediately. Electric current produces a magnetic field. The magnetic field can be visualized as a pattern of circular field lines surrounding the wire that persists as long as there is current.
Electromagnetic induction
Main article: Electromagnetic induction

Magnetic fields can also be used to make electric currents. When a changing magnetic field is applied to a conductor, an electromotive force (EMF) is induced,[21]: 1004  which starts an electric current, when there is a suitable path.
Alternating electric current flows through the solenoid, producing a changing magnetic field. This field causes an electric current to flow in the wire loop by electromagnetic induction.
Radio waves
Main article: Radio waves
Further information: Radio-frequency current

When an electric current flows in a suitably shaped conductor at radio frequencies, radio waves can be generated. These travel at the speed of light and can cause electric currents in distant conductors.
Conduction mechanisms in various media
Main articles: Electrical conductivity and Charge transport mechanisms

In metallic solids, electric charge flows by means of electrons, from lower to higher electrical potential. In other media, any stream of charged objects (ions, for example) may constitute an electric current. To provide a definition of current independent of the type of charge carriers, conventional current is defined as moving in the same direction as the positive charge flow. So, in metals where the charge carriers (electrons) are negative, conventional current is in the opposite direction to the overall electron movement. In conductors where the charge carriers are positive, conventional current is in the same direction as the charge carriers.

In a vacuum, a beam of ions or electrons may be formed. In other conductive materials, the electric current is due to the flow of both positively and negatively charged particles at the same time. In still others, the current is entirely due to positive charge flow. For example, the electric currents in electrolytes are flows of positively and negatively charged ions. In a common lead-acid electrochemical cell, electric currents are composed of positive hydronium ions flowing in one direction, and negative sulfate ions flowing in the other. Electric currents in sparks or plasma are flows of electrons as well as positive and negative ions. In ice and in certain solid electrolytes, the electric current is entirely composed of flowing ions.
Metals

In a metal, some of the outer electrons in each atom are not bound to the individual molecules as they are in molecular solids, or in full bands as they are in insulating materials, but are free to move within the metal lattice. These conduction electrons serve as charge carriers that can flow through the conductor as an electric current when an electric field is present. Metals are particularly conductive because there are many of these free electrons. With no external electric field applied, these electrons move about randomly due to thermal energy but, on average, there is zero net current within the metal. At room temperature, the average speed of these random motions is 106 metres per second.[22] Given a surface through which a metal wire passes, electrons move in both directions across the surface at an equal rate. As George Gamow wrote in his popular science book, One, Two, Three...Infinity (1947), "The metallic substances differ from all other materials by the fact that the outer shells of their atoms are bound rather loosely, and often let one of their electrons go free. Thus the interior of a metal is filled up with a large number of unattached electrons that travel aimlessly around like a crowd of displaced persons. When a metal wire is subjected to electric force applied on its opposite ends, these free electrons rush in the direction of the force, thus forming what we call an electric current."

When a metal wire is connected across the two terminals of a DC voltage source such as a battery, the source places an electric field across the conductor. The moment contact is made, the free electrons of the conductor are forced to drift toward the positive terminal under the influence of this field. The free electrons are therefore the charge carrier in a typical solid conductor.

For a steady flow of charge through a surface, the current I (in amperes) can be calculated with the following equation: I = Q t , {\displaystyle I={Q \over t}\,,} where Q is the electric charge transferred through the surface over a time t. If Q and t are measured in coulombs and seconds respectively, I is in amperes.

More generally, electric current can be represented as the rate at which charge flows through a given surface as:

I = d Q d t . {\displaystyle I={\frac {\mathrm {d} Q}{\mathrm {d} t}}\,.}
Electrolytes
Main article: Conductivity (electrolytic)
A proton conductor in a static electric field

Electric currents in electrolytes are flows of electrically charged particles (ions). For example, if an electric field is placed across a solution of Na+ and Cl− (and conditions are right) the sodium ions move towards the negative electrode (cathode), while the chloride ions move towards the positive electrode (anode). Reactions take place at both electrode surfaces, neutralizing each ion.

Water-ice and certain solid electrolytes called proton conductors contain positive hydrogen ions ("protons") that are mobile. In these materials, electric currents are composed of moving protons, as opposed to the moving electrons in metals.

In certain electrolyte mixtures, brightly coloured ions are the moving electric charges. The slow progress of the colour makes the current visible.[23]
Gases and plasmas

In air and other ordinary gases below the breakdown field, the dominant source of electrical conduction is via relatively few mobile ions produced by radioactive gases, ultraviolet light, or cosmic rays. Since the electrical conductivity is low, gases are dielectrics or insulators. However, once the applied electric field approaches the breakdown value, free electrons become sufficiently accelerated by the electric field to create additional free electrons by colliding, and ionizing, neutral gas atoms or molecules in a process called avalanche breakdown. The breakdown process forms a plasma that contains enough mobile electrons and positive ions to make it an electrical conductor. In the process, it forms a light emitting conductive path, such as a spark, arc or lightning.

Plasma is the state of matter where some of the electrons in a gas are stripped or "ionized" from their molecules or atoms. A plasma can be formed by high temperature, or by application of a high electric or alternating magnetic field as noted above. Due to their lower mass, the electrons in a plasma accelerate more quickly in response to an electric field than the heavier positive ions, and hence carry the bulk of the current. The free ions recombine to create new chemical compounds (for example, breaking atmospheric oxygen into single oxygen [O2 → 2O], which then recombine creating ozone [O3]).[24]
Vacuum

Since a "perfect vacuum" contains no charged particles, it normally behaves as a perfect insulator. However, metal electrode surfaces can cause a region of the vacuum to become conductive by injecting free electrons or ions through either field electron emission or thermionic emission. Thermionic emission occurs when the thermal energy exceeds the metal's work function, while field electron emission occurs when the electric field at the surface of the metal is high enough to cause tunneling, which results in the ejection of free electrons from the metal into the vacuum. Externally heated electrodes are often used to generate an electron cloud as in the filament or indirectly heated cathode of vacuum tubes. Cold electrodes can also spontaneously produce electron clouds via thermionic emission when small incandescent regions (called cathode spots or anode spots) are formed. These are incandescent regions of the electrode surface that are created by a localized high current. These regions may be initiated by field electron emission, but are then sustained by localized thermionic emission once a vacuum arc forms. These small electron-emitting regions can form quite rapidly, even explosively, on a metal surface subjected to a high electrical field. Vacuum tubes and krytrons are some of the electronic switching and amplifying devices based on vacuum conductivity.
Superconductivity
Main article: Superconductivity

Superconductivity is a phenomenon of exactly zero electrical resistance and expulsion of magnetic fields occurring in certain materials when cooled below a characteristic critical temperature. It was discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes on April 8, 1911 in Leiden. Like ferromagnetism and atomic spectral lines, superconductivity is a quantum mechanical phenomenon. It is characterized by the Meissner effect, the complete ejection of magnetic field lines from the interior of the superconductor as it transitions into the superconducting state. The occurrence of the Meissner effect indicates that superconductivity cannot be understood simply as the idealization of perfect conductivity in classical physics.
Semiconductor
Main article: Semiconductor

In a semiconductor it is sometimes useful to think of the current as due to the flow of positive "holes" (the mobile positive charge carriers that are places where the semiconductor crystal is missing a valence electron). This is the case in a p-type semiconductor. A semiconductor has electrical conductivity intermediate in magnitude between that of a conductor and an insulator. This means a conductivity roughly in the range of 10−2 to 104 siemens per centimeter (S⋅cm−1).

In the classic crystalline semiconductors, electrons can have energies only within certain bands (i.e. ranges of levels of energy). Energetically, these bands are located between the energy of the ground state, the state in which electrons are tightly bound to the atomic nuclei of the material, and the free electron energy, the latter describing the energy required for an electron to escape entirely from the material. The energy bands each correspond to many discrete quantum states of the electrons, and most of the states with low energy (closer to the nucleus) are occupied, up to a particular band called the valence band. Semiconductors and insulators are distinguished from metals because the valence band in any given metal is nearly filled with electrons under usual operating conditions, while very few (semiconductor) or virtually none (insulator) of them are available in the conduction band, the band immediately above the valence band.

The ease of exciting electrons in the semiconductor from the valence band to the conduction band depends on the band gap between the bands. The size of this energy band gap serves as an arbitrary dividing line (roughly 4 eV) between semiconductors and insulators.

With covalent bonds, an electron moves by hopping to a neighboring bond. The Pauli exclusion principle requires that the electron be lifted into the higher anti-bonding state of that bond. For delocalized states, for example in one dimension – that is in a nanowire, for every energy there is a state with electrons flowing in one direction and another state with the electrons flowing in the other. For a net current to flow, more states for one direction than for the other direction must be occupied. For this to occur, energy is required, as in the semiconductor the next higher states lie above the band gap. Often this is stated as: full bands do not contribute to the electrical conductivity. However, as a semiconductor's temperature rises above absolute zero, there is more energy in the semiconductor to spend on lattice vibration and on exciting electrons into the conduction band. The current-carrying electrons in the conduction band are known as free electrons, though they are often simply called electrons if that is clear in context.
Current density and Ohm's law
Main article: Current density

Current density is the rate at which charge passes through a chosen unit area.[25]: 31  It is defined as a vector whose magnitude is the current per unit cross-sectional area.[2]: 749  As discussed in Reference direction, the direction is arbitrary. Conventionally, if the moving charges are positive, then the current density has the same sign as the velocity of the charges. For negative charges, the sign of the current density is opposite to the velocity of the charges.[2]: 749  In SI units, current density (symbol: j) is expressed in the SI base units of amperes per square metre.[4]: 22 

In linear materials such as metals, and under low frequencies, the current density across the conductor surface is uniform. In such conditions, Ohm's law states that the current is directly proportional to the potential difference between two ends (across) of that metal (ideal) resistor (or other ohmic device): I = V R , {\displaystyle I={V \over R}\,,}

where I {\displaystyle I} is the current, measured in amperes; V {\displaystyle V} is the potential difference, measured in volts; and R {\displaystyle R} is the resistance, measured in ohms. For alternating currents, especially at higher frequencies, skin effect causes the current to spread unevenly across the conductor cross-section, with higher density near the surface, thus increasing the apparent resistance.
Speed
Drift speed
Main article: Drift speed

The mobile charged particles within a conductor move constantly in random directions, like the particles of a gas. (More accurately, a Fermi gas.) To create a net flow of charge, the particles must also move together with an average drift rate. Electrons are the charge carriers in most metals and they follow an erratic path, bouncing from atom to atom, but generally drifting in the opposite direction of the electric field. The speed they drift at can be calculated from the equation:

I = n A v Q , {\displaystyle I=nAvQ\,,}

where

    I {\displaystyle I} is the electric current
    n {\displaystyle n} is number of charged particles per unit volume (or charge carrier density)
    A {\displaystyle A} is the cross-sectional area of the conductor
    v {\displaystyle v} is the drift velocity, and
    Q {\displaystyle Q} is the charge on each particle.

Typically, electric charges in solids flow slowly. For example, in a copper wire of cross-section 0.5 mm2, carrying a current of 5 A, the drift velocity of the electrons is on the order of a millimetre per second. To take a different example, in the near-vacuum inside a cathode ray tube, the electrons travel in near-straight lines at about a tenth of the speed of light.
Wavefront speed
Main article: Speed of electricity

Any accelerating electric charge, and therefore any changing electric current, gives rise to an electromagnetic wave that propagates at very high speed outside the surface of the conductor. This speed is usually a significant fraction of the speed of light, as can be deduced from Maxwell's equations, and is therefore many times faster than the drift velocity of the electrons. For example, in AC power lines, the waves of electromagnetic energy propagate through the space between the wires, moving from a source to a distant load, even though the electrons in the wires only move back and forth over a tiny distance.

The ratio of the speed of the surrounding electromagnetic wave to the speed of light in free space is called the velocity factor, and depends on the electromagnetic properties of the conductor and the insulating materials surrounding it, and on their shape and size.

The magnitudes (not the natures) of these three velocities can be illustrated by an analogy with the three similar velocities associated with gases (see also hydraulic analogy):

    The low drift velocity of charge carriers is analogous to air motion; in other words, winds.
    The high speed of electromagnetic waves is roughly analogous to the speed of sound in a gas (sound waves move through air much faster than large-scale motions such as convection)
    The random motion of charges is analogous to heat – the thermal velocity of randomly vibrating gas particles.




Ham Radio
FOR

DUMmIES

‰

by Ward Silver

Ham Radio
FOR

DUMmIES

‰

Ham Radio
FOR

DUMmIES

‰

by Ward Silver

Ham Radio For Dummies®
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
Copyright © 2004 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as per­
mitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley Publishing,
Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, (317) 572-3447, fax (317) 572-4447, e-mail:
permcoordinator@wiley.com.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A Reference for the
Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way, Dummies.com, and related trade
dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United
States and other countries, and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
GENERAL DISCLAIMER: THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WAR­
RANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK
AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES
OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY
SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT
BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE
PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL SER­
VICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A COMPETENT PROFES­
SIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE
LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS
REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER INFOR­
MATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFORMATION
THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. FURTHER,
READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED
OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 800-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax
317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2004101969
ISBN: 0-7645-5987-7
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1B/QV/QU/QU/IN

About the Author
Ward Silver NØAX has been a licensed ham since 1972 at the age of 17. Ward’s
experiences in ham radio contributed greatly to a 20-year career in broadcast­
ing and as an electrical engineer and programmer, developing instrumentation
and medical electronics. In 2000, he turned to teaching and writing as a second
career. He is currently adjunct faculty with Seattle University’s Electrical and
Computer Engineering department, concentrating on laboratory instruction.
You can find his monthly columns and articles in QST magazine and in the
biweekly e-mail newsletter, “The Contester’s Rate Sheet.” He is the author of
the ARRL’s online course, “Antenna Design and Construction.” His ham radio
interests include multi-operator and low-power (QRP) contesting, DX-ing,
and antenna design. He is the author of “NØAX’s Radio Puzzler” (a collection
of quizzes and puzzles), and co-author (with K7LXC) of “HF Tribander
Performance - Test Methods & Results” and “HF Vertical Performance - Test
Methods & Results.” He is the winner of the 2003 Bill Orr Technical Writing
Award.

Dedication
This book is dedicated to my all-ham family — my wife Nancy W7FIR and sons
Webster KD7FYX and Lowell KD7DQO — who frequently see little of Dad except
the back of his head as he hammers away at the keyboard creating another arti­
cle or chapter. And dedicated as well to my own ham radio Elmers: Bill KJ7PC,
Randy WB9FSL, Jerry WAØACF, and Danny K7SS who helped me turn “Can I?”
into “I did!” Thanks, one and all!

Author’s Acknowledgments
I would like to gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the American Radio
Relay League for providing a number of excellent graphics and for its exten­
sive Web site that provides so much value to many hams around the world.
I also thank the administrators of eHam.net, QRZ.com, and AC6V.com Web
portals for providing many useful links and extensive archives. All these orga­
nizations and the creators of the many other Web sites referenced in this
book exemplify the best of ham spirit.
Also supporting me in many ways were the members of the Western
Washington DX Club W7DX, the Vashon-Maury Island Radio Club W7VMI, and
many great friends all over the world that share a deep friendship and appre­
ciation of the magic of radio; you know who you are.
Thank you and Very 73.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments through our online registration form
located at www.dummies.com/register/.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
Acquisitions, Editorial, and Media
Development

Production

Project Editor: Christopher Morris

Editorial Manager: Kevin Kirschner

Layout and Graphics: Amanda Carter,
Andrea Dahl, Lauren Goddard,
Denny Hager, Joyce Haughey,
Michael Kruzil, Jacque Schneider,
Julie Trippetti, Mary Gillot Virgin

Media Development Supervisor:
Richard Graves

Proofreaders: Carl Pierce, Brian H. Walls,
TECHBOOKS Production Services

Editorial Assistant: Amanda Foxworth

Indexer: TECHBOOKS Production Services

Acquisitions Editor: Melody Layne
Technical Editor: Kirk A. Kleinschmidt

Project Coordinator: Courtney MacIntyre

Cartoons: Rich Tennant (www.the5thwave.com)

Publishing and Editorial for Technology Dummies
Richard Swadley, Vice President and Executive Group Publisher
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher
Mary C. Corder, Editorial Director
Publishing for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher
Joyce Pepple, Acquisitions Director
Composition Services
Gerry Fahey, Vice President of Production Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services

Contents at a Glance
Introduction .................................................................1
Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?............................7
Chapter 1: Getting Acquainted with Ham Radio.............................................................9
Chapter 2: Getting a Handle on Ham Radio Technology .............................................19
Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group .................................................29

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process..............49
Chapter 4: Figuring Out the Licensing System .............................................................51
Chapter 5: Studying for Your License ............................................................................61
Chapter 6: Taking the Test ..............................................................................................71
Chapter 7: Obtaining Your License and Call Sign .........................................................79

Part III: Hamming It Up..............................................89
Chapter 8: Making Contact..............................................................................................91
Chapter 9: Casual Operating .........................................................................................117
Chapter 10: Operating with Intent................................................................................145
Chapter 11: Specialties ..................................................................................................165

Part IV: Building and Operating
a Station That Works ................................................209
Chapter 12: Getting on the Air ......................................................................................211
Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack..............................................................................249
Chapter 14: Housekeeping (Logs and QSLs)...............................................................263
Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio.........................................................................................269

Part V: The Part of Tens ............................................291
Chapter 16: Ten Secrets for Beginners ........................................................................293
Chapter 17: Ten Secrets of the Masters.......................................................................297
Chapter 18: Ten First Station Tips................................................................................301
Chapter 19: Ten Easy Ways to Have Fun on the Radio ..............................................305
Chapter 20: Ten Ways to Give Back to Ham Radio .....................................................309

Part VI: Appendixes ..................................................313
Appendix A: Glossary ....................................................................................................315
Appendix B: The Best References ................................................................................329

Index .......................................................................341

Table of Contents
Introduction ..................................................................1
About This Book...............................................................................................1
Conventions Used in This Book .....................................................................2
Foolish Assumptions .......................................................................................2
How This Book Is Organized...........................................................................2
Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About? ..................................................3
Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process...................................3
Part III: Hamming It Up...........................................................................3
Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works ......................3
Part V: The Part of Tens.........................................................................4
Part VI: Appendixes................................................................................4
Icons Used in This Book..................................................................................4
Where to Go from Here....................................................................................5

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About? ............................7
Chapter 1: Getting Acquainted with Ham Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Tuning In Ham Radio Today..........................................................................10
Using electronics and technology ......................................................10
Operating a ham radio: Making contacts ..........................................12
Joining the ham radio community .....................................................13
Roaming the World of Ham Radio ................................................................15
Communicating with Ham Radio..................................................................16
Building a Ham Radio Shack .........................................................................16

Chapter 2: Getting a Handle on Ham Radio Technology . . . . . . . . . . . .19
Fundamentals of Radio Waves......................................................................19
Frequency and wavelength .................................................................20
The radio spectrum .............................................................................21
Basic Ham Radio Gadgetry ...........................................................................22
Miscellaneous gadgets.........................................................................23
Ham Radio on the Air ....................................................................................25
Dealing with Mother Nature..........................................................................26

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . .29
Radio Clubs .....................................................................................................29
Finding and choosing a club ...............................................................30
Participating in a club..........................................................................31
Getting involved ...................................................................................32

xii

Ham Radio For Dummies
The ARRL.........................................................................................................33
ARRL’s benefits to you .........................................................................34
ARRL’s benefits to the hobby..............................................................35
ARRL’s benefits to the public ..............................................................36
Specialty Organizations and Clubs ..............................................................37
Handi-Hams ...........................................................................................38
AMSAT....................................................................................................38
TAPR.......................................................................................................39
Young Ladies’ Radio League — the YLRL..........................................39
QRP clubs: ARCI, AmQRP, and G-QRP................................................40
Online Communities ......................................................................................41
Reflectors ..............................................................................................42
Newsgroups...........................................................................................43
Portals....................................................................................................43
Hamfests and Conventions ...........................................................................44
Finding hamfests ..................................................................................44
Finding conventions.............................................................................46

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process ..............49
Chapter 4: Figuring Out the Licensing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51
The Amateur Service: An Overview.............................................................51
Frequency allocations..........................................................................52
Becoming Licensed: Individual License Classes ........................................54
Technician class ...................................................................................55
General class.........................................................................................56
Amateur Extra class .............................................................................56
Grandfathered classes .........................................................................57
Understanding Call Signs ..............................................................................58
The Volunteer Licensing System ..................................................................59
Volunteer Examiner Coordinator (VEC) ............................................59
Volunteer Examiners (VEs) .................................................................60

Chapter 5: Studying for Your License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .61
Demystifying the Test ....................................................................................61
Finding Resources for Study.........................................................................62
Finding licensing classes .....................................................................63
Books, software, and videos ...............................................................64
Online.....................................................................................................64
Finding a Mentor ............................................................................................65
Mastering Morse Code ..................................................................................67

Table of Contents
Chapter 6: Taking the Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .71
Finding a Test Session ...................................................................................71
Signing Up for a Test ......................................................................................73
Public exams .........................................................................................73
Exams at events ....................................................................................73
Private exams........................................................................................73
The Big Day .....................................................................................................74
What to bring with you ........................................................................74
Taking the written exam ......................................................................75
Passing the Morse code test ...............................................................77

Chapter 7: Obtaining Your License and Call Sign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .79
Completing Your Licensing Paperwork .......................................................79
Finding Your New Call Sign ...........................................................................81
Registering with the FCC Online ..................................................................84
Picking Your Own Call Sign ...........................................................................86
Maintaining Your License..............................................................................88

Part III: Hamming It Up ..............................................89
Chapter 8: Making Contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .91
Listen, Listen, Listen! .....................................................................................91
Listening on the different bands ........................................................92
Understanding sub-bands and band plans .......................................92
Tuning In a Signal ...........................................................................................93
Morse code (CW)..................................................................................94
Single-sideband (SSB) ..........................................................................95
FM ...........................................................................................................96
Radioteletype (RTTY) and data signals.............................................97
Listening on HF .....................................................................................98
Listening on VHF and UHF.................................................................100
Deciphering a QSO .......................................................................................103
Chewing the rag ..................................................................................103
Meeting on nets ..................................................................................104
Contesting and chasing DX ...............................................................105
Q-Signals........................................................................................................106
Making a Call.................................................................................................107
Failing to make contact......................................................................109
Breaking in is not hard to do.............................................................111
Having a QSO ......................................................................................111
Calling CQ ............................................................................................114
The long goodbye...............................................................................115

xiii

xiv

Ham Radio For Dummies
Chapter 9: Casual Operating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .117
Operating on FM and Repeaters.................................................................118
Finding a repeater ..............................................................................118
Using tone access and DCS ...............................................................122
Using simplex......................................................................................123
Setting up your radio .........................................................................124
Contacts, FM style ..............................................................................125
Open and closed.................................................................................126
Repeater features ...............................................................................127
Chewing the Rag...........................................................................................131
Knowing where to chew ....................................................................132
Knowing when to chew......................................................................134
Pounding Brass — Morse Code..................................................................137
Copying the code................................................................................138
Sending Morse ....................................................................................138
Code by computer..............................................................................140
Making and responding to Morse code calls ..................................141
Making Morse code contacts (CW)..................................................141
Morse code (CW) clubs .....................................................................142
Receiving Messages Afloat and Remote....................................................142

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .145
Joining an Emergency Organization ..........................................................146
ARES and RACES.................................................................................147
Preparing for an Emergency .......................................................................149
Knowing who ......................................................................................149
Knowing where ...................................................................................149
Knowing what .....................................................................................149
Knowing how ......................................................................................151
Operating in an Emergency.........................................................................152
Reporting an accident or other incident.........................................152
Making and responding to distress calls.........................................154
Supporting emergency communications
outside your area............................................................................155
Providing Public Service .............................................................................156
Weather monitoring ...........................................................................156
Parades and sporting events ............................................................157
Operating on Nets ........................................................................................157
Handling Traffic ............................................................................................159
Getting started ....................................................................................161
Handling a piece of traffic .................................................................161
Delivering the message......................................................................163
Sending a message .............................................................................163

Table of Contents
Chapter 11: Specialties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .165
DX-ing.............................................................................................................165
DX-ing on the shortwave bands .......................................................166
Tuning for DX ......................................................................................167
DX-ing on the VHF/UHF bands ..........................................................174
Taking Part in Radio Contests ....................................................................178
Types of contests ...............................................................................179
Operating in contests ........................................................................180
Calling CQ ............................................................................................184
Submitting a log ..................................................................................185
Being polite .........................................................................................185
Learning about contesting ................................................................186
Chasing Awards ............................................................................................187
Finding awards and special events ..................................................187
Getting the contacts...........................................................................188
Applying for awards ...........................................................................189
QRP: Low-Power Operating ........................................................................189
Getting Digital ...............................................................................................193
Radioteletype (RTTY) ........................................................................193
TOR modes — AMTOR, PACTOR......................................................195
Packet...................................................................................................196
PSK modes...........................................................................................198
Amateur WLAN and high-speed data...............................................199
APRS .....................................................................................................200
Operating on the digital modes ........................................................202
Operating via Satellites ...............................................................................203
Satellite basics ....................................................................................203
Accessing the satellites .....................................................................204
Seeing Things — Image Transmissions .....................................................206
Slow-scan television (SSTV) and Facsimile (Fax)...........................207
Fast-scan television ............................................................................208

Part IV: Building and Operating
a Station That Works .................................................209
Chapter 12: Getting on the Air . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .211
Setting Goals for Your Station.....................................................................211
Goals and personal resources ..........................................................211
Choosing a Radio .........................................................................................215
HF or shortwave radios .....................................................................216
VHF and UHF radios ...........................................................................222
Making a selection..............................................................................224

xv

xvi

Ham Radio For Dummies
Choosing an Antenna...................................................................................225
HF antennas.........................................................................................225
VHF/UHF antennas .............................................................................230
Mobile and portable antennas..........................................................231
Feedline and connectors ...................................................................233
Supporting Your Antenna............................................................................236
Antennas and trees ............................................................................236
Masts and tripods ..............................................................................237
Towers .................................................................................................237
Is it a rotor or rotator? .......................................................................239
Radio accessories...............................................................................240
Computers in the Shack ..............................................................................243
PC or Mac or . . . ?...............................................................................243
Digital modes ......................................................................................244
Radio control ......................................................................................245
Hardware considerations ..................................................................245
Buying New or Used Equipment.................................................................246
Upgrading Your Station ...............................................................................246

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .249
Designing Your Ham Shack .........................................................................249
Keeping a shack notebook ................................................................249
Building in ergonomics ......................................................................250
Ham shack examples .........................................................................253
Mobile and portable station examples ............................................256
Building in RF and Electrical Safety ...........................................................258
Basic safety .........................................................................................258
Lightning..............................................................................................259
RF exposure.........................................................................................259
First aid ................................................................................................260
Grounding Power and RF ............................................................................260
Grounding for AC and DC power ......................................................260
Grounding for RF signals ...................................................................261

Chapter 14: Housekeeping (Logs and QSLs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .263
Keeping a Log ...............................................................................................263
Updating your little black radio book..............................................263
Keeping your log on a computer ......................................................264
Selecting a QSL Card....................................................................................265
Sending and Receiving QSLs.......................................................................266
QSL-ing direct......................................................................................266
Sending via managers ........................................................................267
Bureaus and QSL services.................................................................267
QSL-ing electronically ........................................................................268

Table of Contents
Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .269
Acquiring Tools and Components .............................................................269
Maintenance tools ..............................................................................270
Repairing and building tools.............................................................272
Components for repairs and building..............................................274
Maintaining Your Station.............................................................................275
Overall Troubleshooting Tips.....................................................................276
Troubleshooting Your Station ....................................................................277
RF problems ........................................................................................277
Operational problems........................................................................279
Troubleshooting Your Home and Neighborhood.....................................283
Dealing with interference to other equipment ...............................283
Dealing with interference to your equipment.................................285
Building Equipment from a Kit ...................................................................288
Building Equipment from Scratch..............................................................288

Part V: The Part of Tens .............................................291
Chapter 16: Ten Secrets for Beginners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .293
Listening, Listening, Listening ....................................................................293
Buddying Up .................................................................................................293
Knowing Your Equipment ...........................................................................293
Following the Manufacturer’s Recommendations ...................................294
Trying Different Things ...............................................................................294
Nobody Knows Everything .........................................................................294
Practicing Courtesy .....................................................................................294
Joining In .......................................................................................................295
Getting Right Back in the Saddle................................................................295
Relax, It’s a Hobby!.......................................................................................295

Chapter 17: Ten Secrets of the Masters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .297
Listening, Listening, Listening ....................................................................297
Learning What’s Under the Hood...............................................................297
Reading History............................................................................................297
Having a Sharp Axe ......................................................................................298
Practicing Makes Perfect.............................................................................298
Paying Attention to Detail ...........................................................................298
The Problem Ain’t What You Don’t Know .................................................298
Antennas Make the Difference....................................................................298
A Decibel Is a Decibel Is a Decibel .............................................................299
Ham Radio Is a Lifetime of Learning ..........................................................299

xvii

xviii Ham Radio For Dummies
Chapter 18: Ten First Station Tips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .301
Being Flexible................................................................................................301
Looking and Learning ..................................................................................301
Don’t Put All Your Eggs in One Basket ......................................................302
Used-Equipment Bargains ...........................................................................302
Building Something! .....................................................................................302
Being Well-Grounded ...................................................................................302
Saving Money by Building Your Own Cables ............................................303
Building Step-by-Step...................................................................................303
Finding the Weakest Link ............................................................................303
Being Comfortable .......................................................................................303

Chapter 19: Ten Easy Ways to Have Fun on the Radio . . . . . . . . . . . .305
Listening for People Having Fun and Joining In .......................................305
Special Events and Contests Are Looking for You! ..................................305
Making Up Your Own Contest.....................................................................306
Sending a Radiogram, Ma’am .....................................................................306
Joining the Parade........................................................................................306
Going Somewhere Cool ...............................................................................306
Squirting a Bird.............................................................................................307
Learning a New Lingo ..................................................................................307
Shortwave Listening (SWL-ing) ..................................................................307
Visiting a New Group ...................................................................................307

Chapter 20: Ten Ways to Give Back to Ham Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .309
Preparing Yourself for Emergencies ..........................................................309
Preparing Your Community for Emergencies ...........................................309
Volunteering in Your Club ...........................................................................310
Performing Public Service Assistance.......................................................310
Experimenting ..............................................................................................310
Participating in On-the-Air Monitoring......................................................310
Acting as a Product Tester or QSL Manager.............................................311
Representing Amateur Radio......................................................................311
Being an Elmer..............................................................................................311
Making Lifelong Friendships.......................................................................311

Table of Contents

Part VI: Appendixes...................................................313
Appendix A: Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .315
Appendix B: The Best References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .329
Web Portals...................................................................................................329
Operating References ..................................................................................330
Public service .....................................................................................331
Digital modes ......................................................................................332
DX-ing resources.................................................................................332
Contesting ...........................................................................................333
Satellites ..............................................................................................334
Mobile operation ................................................................................335
Technical References...................................................................................335
General.................................................................................................335
Electronics...........................................................................................336
Antennas..............................................................................................336
VHF/UHF/microwave..........................................................................337
Propagation .........................................................................................338
Amateur Magazines......................................................................................339
Vendors..........................................................................................................340

Index ........................................................................341

xix

xx

Ham Radio For Dummies

Introduction

A

mateur or ham radio has been around for nearly a century. In that time,
it’s grown, branched, morphed, and amplified itself into a worldwide
community of licensed hams tickling the airwaves with every conceivable
means of communications technology. Its practitioners range in age from
preschoolers to septuagenarians. Ham radio’s siren call attracts those who
have never held a microphone as well as deep technical experts who grew up
with a soldering iron and computer.

You may have come across ham radio in any number of ways: in movies such
as Frequency or Contact, in books (the comic book hero TinTin is a ham), from
seeing them in action performing emergency communications services, or
maybe from a friend or relative who enjoys the hobby. Interestingly enough,
ham radio has room for all of these activities. Yes, even a mad scientist or two
are in the ham ranks. Most, however, are just like you.
The storied vision finds the ham bent over a glowing radio, surrounded by all
manner of electronic gadgets and flicking meters, tapping out messages on a
telegraph key or speaking into a large, round, silvery microphone. Today’s
ham has many more options than that to try! While the traditional shortwave
bands are still crowded with ham signals hopping around the planet, hams
now transmit data and pictures through the airwaves, use the Internet, lasers,
and microwave transmitters, and travel to unusual places high and low to
make contact.
Simply stated, ham radio provides the broadest and most powerful wireless
communications capability available to any private citizen anywhere in the
world. Because the world’s citizens are craving ever-closer contact, ham radio
is attracting attention from people like you. The hobby has never had more
to offer and shows no sign of slowing its expansion into new wireless tech­
nologies. Did I say wireless? Think Extreme Wireless!

About This Book
I wrote Ham Radio For Dummies for beginning hams. If you just became inter­
ested in ham radio, you find plenty of information here to explain what the
hobby is all about and how to go about joining the fun by discovering the
basics and getting a license.

2

Ham Radio For Dummies
If you already received your license, congratulations! This book helps you
change from a listener to a doer. Any new hobby, particularly a technical one,
can be intimidating to newcomers. By keeping Ham Radio For Dummies handy
in your radio shack, getting your radio on the air and making contacts is easy.
I cover the basics of getting a station put together properly and the funda­
mentals of on-the-air behavior. Use this book as your personal radio buddy
and soon you’ll sound like a pro!

Conventions Used in This Book
To make the reading experience as clear and uncluttered as possible, I use a
consistent presentation style. Here are the conventions:
 Italics note a new or important term.
 Web site URLs (addresses) are indicated with a monospace font.

Foolish Assumptions
In writing this book I made some assumptions about you. You don’t have to
know a single thing about ham radio or its technology to enjoy Ham Radio
For Dummies. And you definitely don’t need to be an electrical engineer to
enjoy this book.
But I ask two things of you: You have an interest in ham radio and that you
know how to use a computer well enough to surf the Web. Due to the compli­
cated and extensive nature of ham radio, I couldn’t include everything in this
book (otherwise, you wouldn’t be able to lift it). However, I steer you in the
direction of additional resources to check out, including Web sites.

How This Book Is Organized
Ham Radio For Dummies has two major sections. Parts I and II are for readers
getting interested in ham radio and preparing to get a license. Parts III and
IV explain how to set up a station, get on the air, and make contact with
other hams.

Introduction
The Ham Radio For Dummies Web site, at www.dummies.com/go/hamradio,
offers a list of Web resources and more information on the technical aspects
of this wonderful hobby.

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
If you don’t know much about ham radio, start reading this part. You get the
ham radio big picture. Then I send you on a tour of the various radio tech­
nologies necessary to get you on the air. I round out this first part with an
overview of the ham community: clubs and organizations.

Part II: Wading through
the Licensing Process
The four chapters in Part II take you every step of the way through the process
of getting a ham radio license. I explain the overall licensing system, including
the types of licenses and the volunteers that administer the exams. Then I
move on to studying, including Morse code, for your exam. Finally, I discuss the
actual exam process so you know what to expect when the time comes. Part II
concludes with what to do after you pass your test.

Part III: Hamming It Up
The sky is the limit, but first you have to learn to fly. Part III is where you delve
into the fundamentals of ham radio operating. Then you get down to the brass
tacks of basic operation, including how to make that elusive first contact! I
cover the different kinds of casual operating and then get into some of the
popular specialties of the hobby, including public service and emergency
communications.

Part IV: Building and Operating
a Station That Works
Part IV takes you through the basics of setting up and using a suitable sta­
tion. I cover the different kinds of ham radio equipment and how to acquire
what you need to get your station up and running. Ham radios take a little
maintenance and troubleshooting, and I devote a chapter to these topics.

3

4

Ham Radio For Dummies

Part V: The Part of Tens
Familiar to all For Dummies readers, this part is where the accumulated knowl­
edge and wisdom of the ages is boiled down into several condensed lists. I
cover the tips and secrets of ham radio along with general guiding principles
for successful ham radio operation.

Part VI: Appendixes
If you come across an unfamiliar term, turn to the glossary. I have also col­
lected a long list of excellent references — both online and off — for you to
find and use.

Icons Used in This Book
Ham Radio For Dummies includes icons that point out special information.
Here are the icons I use and what they mean:
This icon points out easier, or shorter, ways of doing something.

This icon signals when I show my techy side. If you don’t want to know the
technical details, skip paragraphs marked with this icon.

Whenever I could think of a common problem or “oops,” you see this icon.
Before you become experienced, getting hung up on some of these little
things is easy.

This icon lets you know that some safety rules or performance issues are
associated with the topic of discussion. Watch for this icon to avoid common
gotchas.

This icon points out information that you need to remember to enjoy your
ham radio experience.

Introduction

Where to Go from Here
If you’re not yet a ham, I highly recommend that you find your most comfort­
able chair and read through Parts I and II. You discover the basics about ham
radio and solidify your interest. For the licensed ham, browse through Parts
III and IV to find the topics that most interest you. Take a look through the
appendixes, as well, to find out what information is secreted away back there
for when you need it in a hurry. And for more technical material — and a list
of Web resources — try the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site. For all my
readers, welcome to Ham Radio For Dummies and I hope to meet you on the
air some day!

5

6

Ham Radio For Dummies

Part I

What Is Ham Radio
All About?

G

In this part . . .

et ready to dive into the details of a terrific hobby
and service. In this part, you take a quick peek at
Ham Radio Land, formally known as the Amateur Radio
Service. I start by describing what ham radio is like
today — you will be surprised at its breadth and technical
sophistication. You get a peek at the many ways in which
hams actually communicate and why. Then I show you
what most hams have in an actual radio shack.
Ham radio puts a technical face on many of its facets,
so you get a quick refresher or introduction to the tech­
nology of radio. Then I explain the basic gadgets of ham
radio, explain radio waves, and touch on how radio
depends on the natural environment.
You certainly don’t have to know everything about ham
radio by yourself because a lot of other hams are out
there to lend a hand. In fact, helping others is one of the
long-standing traditions of ham radio, so I show you how
to find a local club and join a ham radio organization: you
can find a large or small club, or one that caters to your
general interest and special purpose. They’re just what
you need to get in-depth knowledge about your own inter­
ests. You also get an introduction to hamfests and the
many ham radio gatherings. You are not alone!

Chapter 1

Getting Acquainted
with Ham Radio
In This Chapter
 Becoming a part of ham radio
 Traversing the world of ham radio
 Making a contact with ham radio
 Constructing a ham radio shack

H

am radio invokes a wide range of visions. Maybe you have a mental
image of a ham radio operator (or ham) from a movie or newspaper
article. But hams are a varied lot — from go-getter emergency communica­
tors to casual chatters to workshop tinkerers. Everyone has a place, and you
do, too.

Hams use all sorts of radios and antennas on a wide variety of frequencies to
communicate with other hams across town and around the world. They use
ham radio for personal enjoyment, for keeping in touch with friends and
family, for emergency communications, and for experimenting with radios
and radio equipment. They communicate using microphones, telegraph or
Morse keys, computers, cameras, lasers, and even their own satellites.
Hams meet on the air and in person. Ham radio clubs and organizations are
devoted to every conceivable purpose. They have special ham radio flea mar­
kets and host conventions, large and small. Hams as young as six years old
and centenarians have been hams since before ham radio licenses. Some
have a technical background, but most do not. One thing all these diverse
individuals do have, however, is an interest in radio that can express itself in
many different ways.

10

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?

Ham: Not just for sandwiches anymore
Everyone wants to know the meaning of the
word “ham,” but as with many slang words, the
origin is murky. Theories abound, of course,
ranging from the initials of an early radio club’s
operators to the use of a meat tin as a natural
sound amplifier. Out of the many possibilities,
this theory condensed from the American Radio
Relay League’s (ARRL) Web site seems the most
believable:
“Ham: a poor operator” was used in telegraphy
even before radio. The first wireless operators
were landline telegraphers who brought with
them their language and much of the tradition

of their older profession. Government stations,
ships, coastal stations, and the increasingly
numerous amateur operators all competed for
signal supremacy in each other’s receivers.
Many of the amateur stations were very pow­
erful and could effectively jam all the other
operators in the area. When this logjam hap­
pened, frustrated commercial operators would
send the message “THOSE HAMS ARE JAM­
MING YOU.” Amateurs, possibly unfamiliar with
the real meaning of the term, picked it up and
wore it with pride. As the years advanced, the
original meaning has completely disappeared.

Tuning In Ham Radio Today
Hams enjoy three different aspects of ham radio — the technology, operating,
and social points of view. Your interest in the hobby may be technical; you may
want to use ham radio for a specific purpose; or you may just want to join the
fun. All are perfectly valid reasons for getting a ham radio license.

Using electronics and technology
Ham radio is full of electronics and technology (see Chapter 2). To start with,
transmitting and receiving radio signals is a very electronics-intensive endeavor.
After you open the hood on ham radio, you’re exposed to everything from
basic direct-current electronics to cutting-edge radio-frequency techniques.
Everything from analog electronics to the very latest in digital signal process­
ing and computing is available in ham radio. I’ve been in the hobby for more
than 30 years and I’ve never met anyone who is an expert on it all.
You may choose to design and build your own equipment or assemble a sta­
tion from factory-built components, just like an audiophile might do. All that
you need for either path is widely available in stores and on the Web. Hams
delight in a do-it-yourself ethic known as homebrewing and help each other
out to build and maintain their stations.

Chapter 1: Getting Acquainted with Ham Radio
Hams also develop their own software and use the Internet along with radios
to create novel hybrid systems. Hams developed packet radio by adapting
data transmission protocols used over computer networks to amateur radio
links. Packet radio is now widely used in many commercial applications. By
combining GPS radiolocation technology with the Web and amateur mobile
radios, the Automatic Position Reporting System (APRS) was developed and
is now widely used. More information about these neat systems is contained
in Parts III and IV.
Voice and Morse code communications are still the most popular technolo­
gies by which hams talk to each other, but computer-based digital operation
is gaining fast. The most common home station configuration today is a hybrid
of the computer and radio. Some of the newer radios are exploring softwaredefined radio (SDR) technology that allows reconfiguration of the circuitry
that processes radio signals under software control.
Along with the equipment and computers, hams are students of antennas and
propagation, which is the means by which radio signals bounce around from
place to place. Hams take an interest in solar cycles, sunspots, and how they
affect the Earth’s ionosphere. For hams, weather takes on a whole new impor­
tance, generating static or fronts along which radio signals can sometimes
travel long distances. Antennas, with which signals are launched to take
advantage of all this propagation, provide a fertile universe for the station
builder and experimenter.
Antenna experimentation is a hotbed of activity for hams. New designs are
created every day and hams have contributed many advances and refinements
to the antenna designer’s art. Antenna systems range from small patches of
printed circuit board material to multiple towers festooned with large rotating
arrays. All you need is some wire, a feedline, and a soldering iron.
Hams also use radio technology in support of hobbies such as radio control
(R/C), model rocketry, and meteorology. Hams have special frequencies for
R/C operation in the 6-meter band, away from the crowded unlicensed R/C
frequencies. Miniature ham radio video transmitters are frequently flown in
model aircraft, rockets, and balloons, beaming back pictures from heights of
hundreds and thousands of feet. Ham radio data links are also used in support
of astronomy, aviation, auto racing and rallies, and many other pastimes.
Whatever part of electronic and computing technology you most enjoy, it’s all
used in ham radio somewhere . . . and sometimes all at once!

11

12

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?

Operating a ham radio: Making contacts
If you were to tune a radio across the ham bands, what would you hear hams
doing? Contacts run the range from simple conversation to on-the-air meet­
ings to contesting (recording the highest number of contacts).

Ragchews
By far the most common type of activity for hams is just engaging in conver­
sation, which is called chewing the rag; such contacts are called ragchews.
Ragchews take place between continents or across town. You don’t have to
know another ham to have a great ragchew — ham radio is a very friendly
hobby with little class snobbery or distinctions. Just make contact and start
talking! Find out more about ragchews in Chapter 9.

Nets
Nets (an abbreviation for networks) are organized on-the-air meetings sched­
uled for hams with a similar interest or purpose. Some of the nets you can
find are
 Traffic nets: These are part of the North American system that moves
text messages or traffic via ham radio. Operators meet to exchange or
relay messages, sometimes handling dozens in a day. Messages range
from the mundane to emergency health-and-welfare.
 Emergency service nets: Most of the time, these nets just meet for train­
ing and practice. When disasters or other emergencies strike, hams orga­
nize around these nets and provide crucial communications into and out
of the stricken areas until normal links are restored.
 Technical Service: These nets are like radio call-in programs in which
stations call with specific questions or problems. The net control station
may help, but more frequently, one of the listening stations contributes
the answer. Many are designed specifically to assist new hams.
 ALE Mailboxes and Bulletin Boards: If you could listen to Internet sys­
tems make contact and exchange data, this is what they’d sound like.
Instead of transmitting 1s and 0s as voltages on wires, hams use tones.
ALE stands for Automatic Link Establishment and means that a computer
system is monitoring a frequency all the time so that others can connect
to it and send or retrieve messages. Sailors and other travelers use ham
radio where the Internet isn’t available.
 Swap Nets: In between the in-person hamfests and flea markets, in many
areas a weekly swap net allows hams to list items for sale or things they
need. A net control station moderates the process and business is gener­
ally conducted over the phone once the parties have been put in contact
with each other.

Chapter 1: Getting Acquainted with Ham Radio

It’s better than “masticating the towel”
Unlike “ham,” the origins of “ragchew” are
fairly clear. The phrase “chewing the rag” is well
known back to the late Middle Ages. “Chew”
was slang for “talk,” and “rag” is derived from
“fat,” or is a reference to the tongue. “Chew­
ing the rag” thus became a phrase referring to

conversation, frequently while sitting around a
meal. Hams picked up that usage from telegra­
phers, and because most of ham radio is, in fact,
conversations, it has been a part of radio from
its earliest days.

DX-ing, contests, and awards
DX stands for distance and the lure of making contacts ever-farther from home
has always been a part of ham radio. Hams compete to contact faraway sta­
tions and to log contacts with every country. They enjoy contacting islands
and making personal friends in a foreign country. When conditions are right
and the band is full of foreign accents, succumbing to the lure of DX is easy!
Ham radio’s version of rugby, contests are events in which the point is to make
as many contacts as possible, sometimes thousands, during the contest time
period, by sending and receiving short messages. These exchanges are related
to the purpose of the contest — to contact a specific area, use a certain band,
find a special station, or just contact everybody.
Along with contests, thousands of special-event stations and awards are
available for various operating accomplishments, such as contacting different
countries or states. For example, in December 2003, the station W4B was set
up at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, and operated during the centennial of the
Wright Brothers’ first flight.
DX-ing, contests, and awards are closely related, and if you enjoy the thrill of
the chase, go to Chapter 11 to find out more about all of these activities.

Joining the ham radio community
Because of their numbers and reliance on uncomplicated infrastructure,
hams are able to bounce back quickly when a natural disaster or other emer­
gency makes communications over normal channels impossible. Hams orga­
nize themselves into local and regional teams that practice responding to a
variety of emergency needs, working to support public safety agencies such
as police and fire departments.

13

14

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
Is it hurricane season? Every fall in North America, ham emergency teams gear
up for these potentially devastating storms. Hams staff an amateur station at
the National Hurricane Center in Florida (www.fiu.edu/orgs/w4ehw/) and
keep the Hurricane Watch Net busy on 14.325 MHz (www.hwn.org/). After the
storm, hams are the first voices heard from the affected areas with many more
standing by to relay their messages and information.
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, hams manned an emergency
operations center around the clock for weeks. Government agencies had to
focus on coordinating recovery and rescue efforts. The hams were able to
handle “health-and-welfare” messages to support the emergency workers in
their efforts.
Every June, on the last full weekend, hams across the United States engage in
an emergency operations exercise called Field Day. It’s an opportunity for hams
to operate under emergency conditions. An amateur emergency team or sta­
tion probably is operating in your town or county.
Hams provide assistance for more than emergencies. Wherever there is a
parade, festival, marathon, or other opportunity to provide communications
services, you may find ham radio operators helping out. In fact, this is great
training for emergencies!
A particularly beneficial relationship exists between ham radio and philately,
or stamp collecting. Hams routinely exchange postcards called QSLs with
their call signs, information about their stations, and often colorful graphics
or photos. Stamp collecting hams combine the exchange of QSLs with collect­
ing by sending the cards around the world with local colorful stamps or spe­
cial postmarks. Foreign hams return the favor with a stamp of their own. The
cheerful greeting of those red-and-blue airmail envelopes from an exotic loca­
tion is a special treat!
Hams like to meet in person as well as on the radio. Membership in at least
one radio club is a part of nearly every ham’s life. In fact, in some countries,
you’re required to be a member of a club before you can even get a license.
Chapter 3 shows you how to find and join clubs — they’re great sources of
information and assistance for new hams.
The two other popular ham gatherings are hamfests and conventions. A hamfest is a ham radio flea market where hams bring their electronic treasures
for sale or trade. Some are small, parking-lot-size get-togethers on a Saturday
morning while others attract thousands of hams from all over the world and
last for days. These are more like the conventions hams hold with a variety of
themes from public service to DX and low-power operating. Hams travel all
over the world to attend conventions and meet friends known only as a voice
and a call sign over the crackling radio waves.

Chapter 1: Getting Acquainted with Ham Radio

Roaming the World of Ham Radio
Although the United States has a large population of hams, it by no means rep­
resents the majority. The amateur population in Europe is growing by leaps
and bounds, and Japan has an even larger amateur population. With more
than 3 million hams worldwide, very few countries are without an amateur.
Hams are required to have a license, no matter where they operate. The inter­
national agency that manages radio activity is the International Telecommuni­
cation Union, or ITU (www.itu.int/home/). Each member country is required
to have its own government agency that controls licensing inside its borders. In
the United States, hams are part of the Amateur Radio Service, which is regu­
lated and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Outside
the United States, Amateur Radio is governed by similar rules and regulations.
Amateur Radio licenses in America are granted by the FCC, but the tests are
administered by other hams acting as volunteer examiners, or VEs. I discuss
VEs in detail in Chapter 4. Classes and testing programs are often available
through local clubs.
Since the adoption of international licensing regulations, hams operate from
many different countries with a minimum of paperwork. For example, a ham
from a country that is a party to the international license recognition agree­
ment known as CEPT can use his or her home license to operate from within
any other CEPT country. The ARRL has gathered a lot of useful material about
international operating on its Web site at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/
regulations/io.

Hams across the world
Where are the hams and how many are around
this big world? Over 3 million populate the ama­
teur bands, although not all are equally active.
As of 2000, the International Amateur Radio
Union (IARU) counted 195 different countries
with a national radio society. The growing coun­
tries of the Pacific Rim have substantial ama­
teur populations. Europe, Africa, and Russia

total 442,193. The Americas total nearly 1 million
with 830,492. Asia and the Pacific countries
have the most at 1,714,087. Amateur numbers
are showing moderate growth in North America
and strong growth in Asia and Europe. Tune the
bands on a busy weekend and you’ll see what I
mean!

15

16

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
Because radio signals know no boundaries, hams have always been in touch
across the political borders. Even during the Cold War, U.S. and Soviet hams
made regular contact, fostering long personal friendships and international
goodwill. While the Internet makes global communications easy, chatting by
voice or Morse code over the airwaves to someone in another country is
exciting.

Communicating with Ham Radio
Though you make contacts for different purposes — chatting, emergencies, a
net, or to win a contest — most contacts follow the same structure.
After you get a response from your call or respond to someone else calling,
you exchange names, information about who you are, and the quality of your
signal to gauge conditions. If you’re chatting, you can talk about how you
constructed your station, what you do for a living, your family, and your job.
Except for the fact that you take turns transmitting and information is con­
verted to radio waves that bounce off the upper atmosphere, contacts are just
like talking to someone that you meet at a party or convention. You can hold
the same conversation by voice, using Morse code, or typing from keyboard
to keyboard using computers as intermediaries to the radios. You won’t find
great purpose behind the average contact except a desire to meet another
ham and see where your radio signal can be heard.
A frequent question asked about ham radio is, “How do know where to tune for
a certain station?” and the answer is usually, “You don’t!” Ham radio operators
don’t have specific frequency assignments or use channel numbers. The good
news is that ham radio has an unparalleled flexibility to make and maintain
communications under continually changing circumstances. The bad news is
that making contact with one specific station is hard because you may not
know on what frequency to call them. However, hams have found many ways
around the latter problem with the result being an extraordinarily powerful and
adaptive communications service.

Building a Ham Radio Shack
The term radio shack, for me, conjures visions more worthy of a mad scientist’s lab than a modern ham station. But your radio shack is simply the place
you keep your radio and ham equipment. The days of bulbous vacuum tubes,
jumping meters, and two-handed control knobs are in the distant past.

Chapter 1: Getting Acquainted with Ham Radio

Shacks that aren’t Lakers
Where did the phrase, radio shack, come from?
Back in the early days of radio, the equipment
was highly experimental and all home-built,
requiring a nearby workshop. In addition, the
first transmitters used a noisy spark to generate
radio waves. The voltages were high and the
equipment somewhat of a mess, so the radio

hobbyists often found themselves banished from
the house proper. Thus, many early stations
were built in a garage or tool shed. The term
“shack” was only natural and carries through
today as a description of the state of order and
cleanliness found in many a ham’s lair.

For some hams, the entire shack consists of a hand-held radio or two. Other
hams operate on the go in a vehicle. Cars make perfectly good shacks, but
most hams have a spot somewhere at home they claim for a ham radio.
Here’s what you can find in a ham shack:
 The rig: The offspring of the separate receiver and transmitter of yore, the
modern radio or rig combines both in a single, compact package about the
size of a large DVD player. Like its ancestors, a large tuning knob controls
the frequency. Unlike them, state-of-the-art digital displays replace the
dials and meters.
 Computer: A majority of hams today have at least one computer in the
shack. Computers now control many radio functions (including keeping
records). Using digital data communications simply wouldn’t be possi­
ble without one. Some hams use more than one computer at a time.
 Mobile/base rig: For operating on the local repeater stations, hams may
use a hand-held radio, but in the shack a more capable radio is used.
These units are about the size of a good-sized hardcover book and you
can use them as either a mobile or base rig.
 Microphones, keys, and headphones: Depending on the shack owner’s
preferences, you see a couple (or more!) of these important gadgets, the
radio’s true user interface. Mikes and keys range from imposing and
chrome-plated to miniaturized and hidden. The old Bakelite headphones
or cans are also a distant memory (good — they hurt my ears!), replaced
with lightweight and comfortable, hi-fi quality designs.
 Antennas: In the shack, you find switches and controllers for antennas
that live outside the shack. Outside, a ham shack tends to sprout anten­
nas ranging from vertical whips the size of a pencil to wire antennas
stretched through the trees and on up to super-sized directional beams
held high in the air on steel towers. See Chapter 12 for more info on
antennas.

17

18

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
 Cables and feedlines: Look behind, around, or under any piece of shack
equipment and you find wires. Lots of them. The radio signals pipe
through fat, black round cables called coaxial (coax). You’re probably
familiar with audio cables from stereo equipment. Power is supplied by
colored wires not terribly different in size from house wiring. I cover
cables and feedlines in more detail in Chapter 12.
Although you perform many of the same functions as the hams from the nine­
teenth century, the modern shack is as far removed from the home-brewed
breadboards in the backyard shed as a late model sedan is from a Model T. You
can see examples of several different shacks, including mine, in Chapter 13.

Chapter 2

Getting a Handle on Ham
Radio Technology
In This Chapter
 Calculating radio waves
 Stocking your shack with gadgets
 Understanding the effects of nature on ham radio

H

am radio covers a lot of technological territory. And to be successful in
ham radio, you need to have a general understanding of the technology
that makes up ham radio. In this chapter, I cover the most common terms
and ideas that form the foundation of ham radio.

Fundamentals of Radio Waves
Understanding ham radio (or any radio) is impossible without also having a
general understanding of the purpose of radio — to send and receive infor­
mation by using radio waves.
Radio waves are just another form of light and travel at the same speed: 186,000
miles per second. Radio waves can get to the moon and back in 21⁄ 2 seconds or
circle the Earth in 1⁄ 7 of a second.
An electric field and a magnetic field carry the energy of a radio wave. These
fields affect charged particles, such as the electrons in a wire, and make them
move. Electrons move in specific ways: They move parallel to electric fields
and in circular motions in response to magnetic fields. These moving electrons
(that is, current) also create moving electric and magnetic fields (in other words,
radio waves) and vice versa.

20

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
Transmitters cause electrons to move so that they, in turn, create the moving
fields of radio waves. Antennas are just structures for electrons to move in to
create radio waves. The electrons in an antenna also move in response to
radio waves launched by other antennas. Receivers then detect the electron
motion caused by the incoming radio waves. The energy is just transferred
from electrons to radio waves and back to electrons at the other station.

Frequency and wavelength
The radio wave-electron relationship has a wrinkle. The fields of the radio
wave aren’t just one strength all the time — they vary between a positive and
a negative value, or oscillate, like a vibrating string moves above and below
its stationary position. The time a field’s strength takes to go through one
complete set of values is called a cycle. The number of cycles in one second
is the frequency of the wave, measured in hertz (abbreviated Hz).
One other wrinkle — the wave is also moving at the speed of light, which is
constant. If you could watch the wave oscillate as it moved, you would see
that the wave always moves the same distance (one wavelength) in one cycle.
The higher the wave’s frequency, the quicker a cycle completes, and the less
time it has to move during one cycle. High frequency waves have short wave­
lengths and low frequency waves have long wavelengths.
If you know a radio wave’s frequency, you can figure out the wavelength
because the speed of light is always the same. Here’s how:
Wavelength = Speed of light / Frequency of the wave
Wavelength in meters = 300,000,000 / Frequency in hertz
Similarly, if you know how far the wave moves in one cycle (the wavelength),
you also know how fast it oscillates because the speed of light is fixed.
Frequency in hertz = 300,000,000 / Wavelength in meters
Frequency is abbreviated as f, the speed of light as c, and wavelength as the
Greek letter lambda, λ, leading to the following simple equations:
f = c / λ and λ = c / f
Radio waves oscillate at frequencies between a few hundred kilohertz, or kHz
(kilo is the metric abbreviation meaning 1,000), up to 1,000 gigahertz, or GHz
(giga is the metric abbreviation meaning 1 billion). They have corresponding
wavelengths from hundreds of meters at the low frequencies to a fraction of a
millimeter (mm) at the high frequencies.

Chapter 2: Getting a Handle on Ham Radio Technology
The most convenient two units to use in thinking of radio wave frequency
(RF) and wavelength are megahertz (MHz; mega means 1 million) and meters
(m). The equation describing the relationship is much simpler when you use
MHz and m:
f = 300 / λ in m and λ = 300 / f in MHz
If you are not comfortable with memorizing equations, an easy way to convert
frequency and wavelength is to memorize just one combination: for example,
300 MHz and 1 meter or 10 meters and 30 MHz. Then use factors of ten to move
in either direction, making frequency larger and wavelength smaller as you go.

The radio spectrum
The range, or spectrum, of radio waves covers a lot. Tuning a radio receiver
to different frequencies, you hear radio waves carrying all kinds of different
information. These frequencies are called signals and are grouped by the type
of information they carry into different ranges of frequencies, called bands.
For example, AM broadcast band stations are at frequencies between 550 and
1700 kHz (550,000 and 1,700,000 hertz or 0.55 and 1.7 MHz). Bands help you
find the signals, without having to hunt over a wide range.
The different users of the radio spectrum are called services, such as the broad­
casting service or Amateur Radio Service. Each service gets a certain amount
of spectrum to use, called a frequency allocation. Amateur Radio, or ham radio,
has quite a number of allocations sprinkled throughout the radio spectrum. I
get into the exact locations for the ham radio bands in Chapter 8.
Radio waves at different frequencies act differently in the way they travel and
require different techniques to transmit and receive. Because waves of simi­
lar frequencies tend to have similar properties, the radio spectrum is divided
into four segments:
 Shortwave or High-Frequency (HF): Frequencies below 30 MHz.
Includes AM broadcasting, ten different ham radio bands, ship-to-shore
and ship-to-ship, military, and Citizens Band.
 Very High Frequency (VHF): Frequencies from 30 to 300 MHz. Includes
TV channels 2 through 13, FM broadcasting, three ham bands, public
safety and commercial mobile radio, and military.
 Ultra High Frequency (UHF): Frequencies from 300 MHz to 1 GHz.
Includes TV channels 14 and higher, two ham bands, cellular phones,
public safety and commercial mobile radio, and military.
 Microwave: Frequencies above 1 GHz. Includes GPS, digital wireless tele­
phones, WiFi wireless networking, microwave ovens, eight ham bands,
satellite TV, and numerous public, private, and military users.

21

22

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
Because a radio wave has a specific frequency and wavelength, hams use the
terms somewhat interchangeably. For instance, the 40-meter and 7 MHz ham
bands are the same thing. Check out Chapter 8 for the specifics on the ham
bands. I will use both in this book so that you become used to interchanging
them as hams are expected to do.

Basic Ham Radio Gadgetry
Although the occasional vacuum tube radio may still be found glowing in an
antiques-loving ham’s station, today’s ham radios are sleek, microprocessorcontrolled communications centers. The basic radio is composed of a receiver
combined with a transmitter to make a transceiver, called a rig by hams. Mobile
and handheld radios are called rigs, too. If the rig doesn’t use AC line power,
use a power supply to provide the DC voltage and current. Figure 2-1 shows a
typical basic station’s components and gadgets.
The radio is connected with a feedline to one or more antennas. Two of the most
popular are shown in Figure 2-1: A dipole is an antenna made from wire and con­
nected to its feedline in the middle. A beam antenna sends and receives radio
waves better in one direction than others and is often mounted on a tall pole or
tower with a rotator that can point it in different directions. Antenna switches
allow the operator to select one of several antennas. An antenna tuner is used
between the antenna/feedline combination and the transmitter, like a vehicle’s
transmission, in order for the transmitter to operate at peak efficiency.
You use headphones and a microphone to communicate using the various
methods of transmitting speech. If Morse code (or CW) is preferred, you can
use the traditional straight key (an old-fashioned Morse code transmission
device), but more commonly you use a paddle and keyer. A paddle and keyer
are much faster than straight keys and require less effort to use. The paddle
looks like a pair of straight keys mounted back to back on their sides. The
keyer converts the closing and opening of each paddle lever into strings of
dots and dashes.
If you use digital data for contacts, a computer or other device is required to
interpret and generate the on-the-air signal. In this case, disconnect the micro­
phone (and probably headphones) and replace them with connections to the
external equipment, as shown in Figure 2-2. A data interface passes signals
between the radio and computer. For some types of data, a computer can’t do
necessary processing, so a multi-protocol controller is used. The computer talks
to the controller using its serial RS-232 (COM) port.

Chapter 2: Getting a Handle on Ham Radio Technology

Dipole
Antennas
Headphones

Paddle

Key

Beam

Feedlines

Keyer

28.385

Transceiver
Figure 2-1:
The basic
station and
common
accessories.

Antenna
tuner
Antenna
switch

Microphone
Power supply

Many radios also have an RS-232 interface that allows a computer to control
the radio directly. You can find a lot of programs that allow you to change fre­
quency and many other radio settings from the keyboard. Computers can
also send and receive Morse code, marrying the hottest twenty-first-century
technology with the oldest form of electronic communications!

Miscellaneous gadgets
Aside from the components that make up your actual operating station, quite
a number of additional tools and pieces of equipment make up the rest of
your gear.

23

24

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
Radio control
RS-232
Transceiver
28.385

Computer
RS-232

Audio to and
from sound card

Audio to
and from
radio
Multi-Protocol
Controller (MPC)

Figure 2-2:
Use a
computer
to send
and receive
digital data.

Data Interface

Feedline measurements
Most radios and antenna tuners have the ability to evaluate the electrical
conditions inside the feedline, measured as the standing wave ratio (SWR).
SWR is a ratio of voltages and tells you how much of the power supplied by
the transmitter is getting radiated by the antenna. Most radios have a built-in
meter that shows feedline SWR. Having a stand-alone SWR sensor, called an
SWR meter or an SWR bridge, to measure SWR is very handy when working on
antennas or operating in a portable situation. You can also measure feedline
conditions by using a power meter, which measures the actual power flowing
back and forth. SWR meters are inexpensive, while power meters are more
accurate. These devices are typically used right at the transmitter output.

Filters
Filters are designed to pass or reject ranges of frequencies. Some filters are
designed to pass or reject only specific frequencies. Filters can be made of
inductors and capacitors, called discrete components, or even from sections
of feedline, called stubs. Filters come in the following varieties:

Chapter 2: Getting a Handle on Ham Radio Technology
 Feedline: Use feedline filters to prevent unwanted signals from getting to
the radio from the antenna or vice versa. On transmitted signals, you can
use them to ensure that unwanted signals from the transmitter are not
radiated, causing interference to others. They also prevent undesired sig­
nals from getting to the receiver where they may compromise receiver
performance.
 Receiving: Receiving filters are installed inside the radio and are usu­
ally made from quartz crystals or from small tuning-fork-like structures.
Receiving filters remove all but a single desired signal in a receiver. Filters
improve a receiver’s selectivity, which refers to its ability to receive the
single signal in the presence of many signals.
 Audio: Use audio filters on the receiver output to provide additional fil­
tering capability, rejecting nearby signals or unwanted noise.
 Notch: A notch filter works to remove a very narrow range of frequen­
cies, such as a single interfering tone.

Feedlines
Two common types of electrical feedlines connect the antennas to the station
and carry RF energy between pieces of equipment. The most common is coax­
ial cable, or just coax, so named because it is constructed of a hollow tube sur­
rounding a central wire concentrically. The outer conductor is called the shield
and also braid, if made from fine woven wire. The wire in the middle is called
the center conductor and is surrounded by insulation that holds it right in the
center of the cable. The outer conductor is covered by a plastic coating called
the jacket. The other kind of feedline is open-wire, also called twin-lead or ladder
line, which is made from two parallel wires. The wires may be exposed, only
held together with insulating spacers, or plastic insulation may cover them.

Ham Radio on the Air
Aside from the equipment, ham radio technology also extends to making con­
tacts and exchanging information. You use the following technologies when
using your ham radio:
 Modulation/Demodulation: Modulation is the process of adding informa­
tion to a radio signal to transmit over the air. Demodulation is the process
of recovering information from a received signal. Ham radios use two
kinds of modulation: amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modula­
tion (FM).
 Modes: Modes are specific types of modulation. You can choose from
several modes when transmitting, some of which include voice, data,
video, or Morse code.

25

26

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
 Repeaters: Repeaters are relay stations that listen on one frequency and
retransmit what they hear on a different frequency. Because they are
often located on tall buildings, towers, or hilltops, they enable hams to
use low-power radios to converse over many miles. They can be linked
together either by radio or the Internet to extend communication around
the world. Repeaters can listen and transmit at the same time, which is
called duplex operation.
 Satellites: Yes, just like the military and commercial services, hams use
satellites. Some amateur satellites act as “repeaters in the sky,” while
others are used as orbiting digital bulletin boards and e-mail servers.
 Computer software: Computers have become a big part of ham radio.
Initially, they were limited to doing paperwork and making calculations
in the shack. Today, they also act as part of the radio, generating and
decoding digital data signals, sending Morse code, and controlling the
radio’s functions. Hams also have constructed radio-linked computer
networks and a worldwide system of e-mail servers accessed by radio.
Hams have always been interested in pushing the envelope in applying and
developing radio technology — which is one of the fundamental reasons that
ham radio exists as a licensed service. Today, that includes creating novel
hybrids of radio and other technologies, such as the Internet and GPS radio
location. For example, the ARRL High Speed Multimedia Working Group is
working to adapt wireless LAN technology to ham radio. The Tucson Amateur
Packet Radio (TAPR) organization has many members around the world devel­
oping new methods of digital communication. You also find ham radio to
be a hotbed of innovation in antenna design and construction. Ham radio is
“techie heaven!”

Dealing with Mother Nature
Because radio waves travel through the natural environment on their way to
space or to another terrestrial station, its phenomena affect them. Thus hams
take a keen interest in propagation.
For local contacts, the radio wave journey along the surface of the Earth is
called ground wave propagation. Ground wave propagation can support com­
munication up to 100 miles, but varies greatly with the frequency being used.
To make longer range contacts, the radio waves must travel through the atmos­
phere. At HF and sometimes at VHF, the upper layers of the atmosphere, called
the ionosphere, reflect the waves back to Earth. The reflection of radio waves is

Chapter 2: Getting a Handle on Ham Radio Technology
called sky wave propagation. Depending on the angle at which the signal is
reflected, a sky wave path can be as long as 2,000 miles. HF signals often
bounce between the Earth’s surface and the ionosphere several times so that
contacts are made worldwide. At VHF, multiple hops are rare but use other
reflecting mechanisms.
Apart from the ionosphere, the atmosphere itself can direct radio waves.
Tropospheric propagation, or just tropo, occurs along weather fronts, tempera­
ture inversions, and other large-scale phenomena in the atmosphere. Tropo is
common at VHF and UHF frequencies, often supporting contacts over 1,000
miles or more.

Ham radios, CB radios, and cellular phones
Radios abound — enough to boggle your mind.
Here are the differences between your ham
radio and those other radios:
 Citizens Band (CB): CB radio uses 40 chan­
nels near the 28 MHz ham band. CB radios
are low-power and useful for local commu­
nications only, although the radio waves
sometimes travel long distances. You don’t
need a license to operate a CB radio. This
lightly-regulated service is plagued by ille­
gal operation that diminishes its usefulness.
 Family Radio Service (FRS) and General
Mobile Radio Service (GMRS): These popu­
lar radios, such as the Motorola Walkabout
models, are designed for short-range com­
munications between family members.
Usually hand-held, both types operate with
low-power on UHF frequencies. FRS opera­
tion is unlicensed, but the higher-power,
more capable GMRS radios do require a
license.
 Broadcasting: Although hams are often
said to be “broadcasting,” this term is
incorrect. Hams are barred from doing any
one-way broadcasting of programs the way

AM, FM, and TV stations do. Broadcasting
without the appropriate license attracts a
lot of attention from a certain government
agency whose initials are FCC.
 Public safety and commercial mobile radio:
The hand-held and mobile radios used by
police, firemen, construction workers, and
delivery companies are similar in many ways
to VHF and UHF ham radios. In fact, the fre­
quency allocations are so similar that hams
often convert surplus equipment. Commer­
cial and public safety radios require a
license to operate.
 Cellular and digital wireless telephones:
Obviously, you don’t need a license to use a
wireless phone, but you can only communi­
cate through a licensed service provider on
one of the wireless phone allocations. The
older, analog phones operate between 800
and 900 MHz, while the newer digital phones
operate near 2 GHz. While the phones are
actually little UHF and microwave radios,
except for a few models, they can’t commu­
nicate directly with each other and are com­
pletely dependent on the wireless phone
network to operate.

27

28

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
Two other VHF- and UHF-reflecting features exist in our atmosphere: the aurora
and meteor trails. When the aurora is strong, it absorbs HF signals, but reflects
VHF and UHF signals adding a characteristic rasp or buzz. Hams active on
those bands know to point their antennas north to see if the aurora can sup­
port an unusual contact. Meteor trails are very hot from the friction of the
meteor’s passage through the atmosphere. So hot, that the gasses become
electrically conductive and reflect signals until they cool. For a few seconds,
a radio mirror floats high above the Earth’s surface. Meteor showers are a
popular time to try the meteor scatter mode.

Chapter 3

Finding Other Hams:
Your Support Group
In This Chapter
 Joining a club
 Becoming a member of the ARRL
 Finding a specialty organization
 Checking out online communities
 Going to hamfests and conventions

A

n Elmer, or mentor (see Chapter 5), is very useful in helping you over the
rough spots every newcomer encounters. As your interests widen, though,
you’ll need additional help. Luckily, hundreds and hundreds of potential Elmers
are in the myriad ham radio clubs and organizations around the world.
One of the oldest traditions of ham radio is helping the newcomer, and hams
are great at providing a little guidance or assistance. You can make your first
forays into ham radio operating much easier and more successful by taking
advantage of those helping hands. This chapter shows you how to find them.

Radio Clubs
The easiest way to get in touch with other hams is through the local radio club.
Radio clubs have been around as long as radio. The first clubs were just groups
of like-minded experimenters who collaborated to build radios when the tech­
nology was raw and success by no means assured. Over time, the club grew in
size and importance. Today, clubs range from small, focused groups to large
clubs, with wide-ranging interests.

30

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
The following points hold true for most hams:
 Most hams belong to at least one club, sometimes several: Belonging to
a general interest club as well as one or two specialty groups is popular.
 Most local or regional clubs have in-person meetings: Membership is
drawn largely from a single area.
 Specialty clubs are focused on activities: Activities such as contesting,
low-power operating, or amateur television, may have a much wider
(even international) membership. See the “Specialty Organizations and
Clubs” section, later in this chapter, to discover different specialty clubs.
 Individual chapters may have no in-person meetings: They may con­
duct meetings only over the air.
Clubs are great resources for assistance and mentorship. As you get started
in ham radio, you’ll find that you need a lot of basic questions answered. I
recommend that you start by joining a general interest club (see the upcom­
ing section). If you can find one that emphasizes assistance to the new ham,
so much the better. You’ll find the road to enjoying ham radio a lot smoother
in the company of others.

Finding and choosing a club
To find ham radio clubs in your area, start at www.qrz.com/clubs.html and
select your state to find a list of the state’s radio club Web sites. The American
Radio Relay League (ARRL) also has a directory of affiliated clubs on its Web
site at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/club/clubsearch.phtml. Enter your
state, city, or zip code to locate nearby clubs.
Focus on the general interest clubs and look for the clubs that offer help to new
hams. For example, I found this listing for one of the largest Seattle, Washing­
ton, clubs through the ARRL Web site:
Name: MIKE & KEY AMATEUR RADIO CLUB
Specialties: General Interest
Call sign: K7LED
Services: Help for newcomers, entry-level classes, higher-level classes,
other
This club is well suited for a new ham. You find yourself in the company of
others recently licensed, so you won’t feel self-conscious when asking ques­
tions. You have programs and activities to learn from and opportunities for
you to contribute.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group
If you have more than one club available in your area, how do you make a
choice? Consider these points when making a decision:
 Which club has meetings that are more convenient for you?
Check out the meeting times and places for each club.
 Which club includes activities or programs that include your interests?
If a club has a Web site or newsletter, review the past few month’s activi­
ties and programs to see if they sound interesting.
 Which club feels more comfortable to you?
Don’t be afraid to attend a meeting or two to find out what the club is like.
You’ll quickly find out that the problem is not finding clubs, but in choosing
among the hundreds of them! Unless the club has a strong personal participa­
tion aspect, such as a public service club, you can join as many as you want
just to find out about that part of ham radio. Most clubs have a newsletter
and a Web site that give you a valuable window into one of ham radio’s many
specialties.

Participating in a club
After you pick a general interest club, show up for meetings, and make a few
friends right away, how do you really start participating? Do ham radio clubs
have a secret protocol? What if you goof up?
Obviously, you won’t start your ham club career by running for president at
your second meeting, but ham clubs are pretty much like every other hobby
group. As such, you can become an insider with easy first steps. You’re the
new guy or gal, which means you have to show you want to belong. Here are
some tips to help you assimilate:
 Show up early and help set up, make the coffee, hang the club banner, help
figure out the projector, and so forth. Stay late and help clean up, too.
 Be sure to sign in, sign on, or sign up if you have an opportunity to do
so, especially if it’s your first meeting.
 Wear a name tag or other identification that announces your name and
call sign in easy-to-read letters.
 Introduce yourself to whomever you sit next to.
 Introduce yourself to a club officer as a visitor or new member. If a “stand
up and identify yourself” routine occurs at the beginning of the meeting,
be sure to identify yourself as a new member or visitor. If other people
also identify themselves as new, go introduce yourself to them later.

31

32

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
 After you’ve been to two or three meetings, you will probably recognize
some of the club’s committees or activities. If one of them sounds inter­
esting, introduce yourself to whoever spoke about it and offer to help.
 Show up at club activities or work parties!
 Comb your hair. Brush your teeth. Sit up straight. Wear matching socks.
Yes, Mom.
These magic tips are not just for ham radio clubs, but also for just about any
club. And just like those other clubs, ham clubs have their own personality.
They vary from wildly welcoming to tightly knit, seemingly impenetrable
groups. Though after you break the ice, hams seem to bond for life. And
when you’re a club elder, remember to extend a hand to new members the
way you appreciated when you were a new face yourself!

Getting involved
Okay, you’re a regular! How can you get involved? In just about every ham
club, you’ll find the following jobs need doing. Find out who is currently in
that position and offer your help. You’ll discover a new aspect of ham radio,
gain a friend, and make a contribution.
 Field days: Planners and organizers can always use a hand in getting
ready for this June operating event. Offer to help with generators, tents,
and food, and find out about the rest of it as you go. Helping out with
field days is a great way to meet the most active members of the club.
 Conventions or hamfests: If the club hosts a regular event, almost any
kind of help is always needed. If you have any kind of organizational or
management expertise, so much the better.
 Awards and club insignia: Managing sales of club insignia is a great job
for new members — keeping records, taking orders, and making sales at
club meetings. If you have an artistic or crafts bent, don’t be afraid to
make suggestions.
 Libraries and equipment: Many clubs maintain a library of reference
books or have equipment that is loaned to members. All you have to do
is keep track of it and make it available to other members.
 Club stations: If your club is fortunate enough to have its own radio shack
or repeater station, some maintenance work — such as working on
antennas, changing batteries, tuning and testing radios, or just cleaning —
always needs to be done. Buddy up with the station manager; you can
become familiar with the equipment very quickly. You need not be techni­
cal, just willing.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group
If you can write or design Web sites, don’t hesitate to volunteer your services
to the club newsletter editor or Webmaster. Chances are that they have sev­
eral projects backlogged and would be delighted to have your help.
Along with the ongoing club committees and business, you usually can find a
number of club-sponsored activities. Some clubs are organized around one
major activity while others seem to have one or two going on every month.
Here are a few common club activities:
 Public service: This activity usually entails providing local communica­
tion during a sporting or civic event, such as a parade or festival. These
events are great ways for you to hone your exchanging messages and
operating skills.
 Contests and challenges: Operating events are great fun and many clubs
enter on-the-air contests as a team or club. Sometimes, clubs challenge
each other to see which can generate the most points. You can either get
on the air yourself or join a multi-operator station.
 Work parties: What’s a club for if not to help out its own members? Rais­
ing a tower or doing antenna work with other members is a great way to
meet active hams and discover this important aspect of station building.
 Construction projects: Building your own equipment and antennas is a lot
of fun, so clubs may occasionally sponsor group construction projects.
Building your own equipment saves money and lets everyone work
together to solve problems. If you like building things or have technical
skills, here’s a great way to help out.
Supporting your club by participating in activities and committees is impor­
tant. For one thing, you can acknowledge the help you get from the other
members. You also start to become a mentor (or Elmer) yourself to other new
members. (See Chapter 5 for more on Elmers.) By being active within the
club, you strengthen the organization, your friendships with others, and the
hobby in general.

The ARRL
The American Radio Relay League (ARRL) is the oldest continuously function­
ing amateur radio organization in the world. Founded before World War I, the
ARRL provides services to hams around the world and plays a key part in rep­
resenting the ham radio cause to the public and governments. That ham radio
could survive for nearly 100 years without a strong leadership organization is
hard to imagine and the ARRL has filled that role.

33

34

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
I am devoting a separate section of this chapter to the ARRL simply because
it is such a large presence within the hobby to U.S. hams (and with its sister
organization, Radio Amateurs of Canada or RAC, to Canadian hams) and
because of the many valuable services it provides, particularly to new hams.

ARRL’s benefits to you
The most visible benefit of ARRL membership is that you receive QST maga­
zine every month. QST, the largest and oldest ham radio magazine (shown in
Figure 3-1), includes feature articles on both technical and operating topics;
reports on regulatory information affecting the hobby; the results of ARRLsponsored competitions; and numerous columns covering a wide variety of
topics. All the largest ham radio equipment manufacturers advertise in QST
as well. Other excellent ham radio magazines exist, but QST is the most widely
read and important.

Figure 3-1:
QST is the
official
magazine of
the ARRL.

Along with the print magazine, the ARRL also maintains an active and sub­
stantial Web site at www.arrl.org. You can find the following features on the
Web site:
 News and general interest stories posted every day
 The Technical Information Service, an extensive reference service, includ­
ing technical document searches with numerous articles available online
 An active ham-radio swap and shop, open 24 hours a day
 A number of free e-mail bulletins and newsletters

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group
The ARRL Field Organization coordinates the activities of hundreds of volun­
teers. While the League has a paid staff at its headquarters in Newington,
Connecticut, the ARRL is by and large a volunteer organization. These volun­
teers are organized into 80 different sections in 15 divisions.
The Field Organization also includes the world’s most extensive non­
governmental radio network, the National Traffic System (NTS). The NTS is
key in rapidly responding to all sorts of emergencies and is active on a daily
basis, passing radio messages, or traffic, all over the world.
Along with administrative and organizational functions, the ARRL is also the
largest single sponsor of operating activities for hams. The ARRL sponsors
numerous competitive events, called contests, award programs, and technical
and emergency exercises.

ARRL’s benefits to the hobby
By far the most visible aspect of the ARRL on the ham bands is the ARRL head­
quarters station, W1AW. Carrying the original call sign of ARRL founder Hiram
Percy Maxim, the powerful station (shown in Figure 3-2) is a worldwide beacon,
beaming bulletins and Morse code practice sessions to hams around the planet
every day. Visiting hams can also operate the W1AW station themselves (don’t
forget your license!). Most hams think being at the controls of one of the most
famous and storied ham stations in all the world is the thrill of a lifetime!

Figure 3-2:
The ARRL
station
W1AW in
Newington,
Connecticut.

35

36

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
The ARRL also provides the Volunteer Examiner Coordinator (VEC) service
(you may have taken your licensing test during an ARRL-VEC session). With
the largest number of volunteer examiners, the ARRL-VEC assists thousands
of new and active hams take their licensing exams, obtain vanity and spe­
cial call signs, renew their licenses, and update their license information of
record. When the FCC could no longer maintain the staff to administer licens­
ing programs, the ARRL and other ham organizations stepped forward to
create the largely self-regulated VEC programs instrumental to today’s healthy
ham radio.
The least visible of its functions is the representation of the Amateur Radio
service to governments and regulatory bodies — arguably one of the most
important functions of the ARRL. Radio spectrum is prime territory in the
telecommunications-driven world and many other services would like to get
access to amateur frequencies, regardless of the long-term impact. The ARRL
also serves as a trusted voice to the FCC and Congress, helping regulators
and legislators understand the special nature and needs of the Amateur
Service.

ARRL’s benefits to the public
Although naturally focused on its membership, the ARRL takes seriously its mis­
sion to support Amateur Radio. The ARRL Web site is largely open to the public
as are all bulletins broadcast by W1AW. The ARRL performs these services:
 Facilitates the development of emergency communications: In conjunc­
tion with the Field Organization, the Amateur Radio Emergency Service
(ARES) teams around the country provide thousands upon thousands of
hours of public service every year. While individual amateurs render
valuable aid in times of emergency, the organization of these efforts mul­
tiplies its usefulness.
 Publishes the ARRL Handbook: Now in its 81st edition, the handbook is
an acknowledged telecommunications industry reference, used by profes­
sionals as well as amateurs. The League publishes numerous technical
references and guides, including conference proceedings and standards,
furthering the state of the radio art.
 Promotes not only ham radio, but also technical awareness, with strong
support programs for elementary through secondary schools: The
League is also involved with the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts Radio merit
badge and Jamboree On-The-Air programs. For hams, the ARRL spon­
sors a growing series of Web-based continuing education courses.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group

Joining the ARRL
The ARRL is a volunteer-based, membershiporiented organization. Just like your local club,
if the ARRL is to provide you with useful services
and effectively represent your interests, you
need to be a member. Better yet, the League

needs you to be a volunteer! Rest assured, even
as a new ham, you can make a meaningful con­
tribution as a volunteer. To find out how to join,
go to www.arrl.org/join.html.

Specialty Organizations and Clubs
Ham radio is big, wide, and deep. The hobby has many individual communities
that fill the airwaves with diverse activities. A specialty club or organization
focuses on one aspect of ham radio that emphasizes certain technologies or
types of operation. Quite a number of specialty organizations have a worldwide
membership, as well.
To find specialty clubs, search the Internet by entering your area of interest
and the word club. For example, entering 10 meter club at www.google.com
turns up nearly a dozen ham clubs or forums.
Some clubs focus on particular operating interests, such as qualifying for
awards or operating on a single band. An example of the latter is the 10-10
International Club (www.ten-ten.org/), which is for operators that prefer
the 10 meter band, a favorite of low-power and mobile stations. The 10-10
Club sponsors several contests every year and offers a set of awards for con­
tacting its members. The Six Meter International Radio Klub (SMIRK) promotes
activity on the 6 meter band with its special and unusual methods of signal
propagation. The club’s contests and awards are listed at www.smirk.org/.
Another type of specialty club is the contest club. Members enjoy participating
in competitive on-the-air events known as radiosports, or simply contests (the
topic of Chapter 11). The clubs challenge each other, sponsor awards and
plaques, and generally encourage members to build up stations and techniques
to become top contest operators. Contest clubs tend to be local or regional
due to the rules of club competition. One of the oldest U.S. clubs, the Yankee
Clipper Contest Club, maintains a list of U.S. contest clubs at www.yccc.org/
Links/Contest_clubs.htm. You can view an extensive list of clubs that
compete in ARRL contests at www.arrl.org/contests/club-list.html,
although many general interest clubs are included. For contest clubs around
the world, try the list at www.ac6v.com/clubs.htm#DX.
No less competitive than contest operators are the long-distance communica­
tions specialists, or DXers, who specialize in long-distance contacts with places
well off the beaten track. The quest to work ’em all (contact every country on

37

38

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
every ham band) lasts a lifetime and leads you to learn obscure geography
when a ham begins transmitting from a tiny island somewhere far away. DXers
form clubs to share operating experiences and host traveling hams, fostering
international communications and goodwill along the way. I belong to the
Western Washington DX Club (www.wwdxc.org) with members worldwide,
although most of them are near Seattle, Washington.
Because of an international nature, DX clubs tend to have members sprinkled
around the globe. If one is in your area, you can find it at www.dailydx.com/
clubs.htm.

Handi-Hams
Ham radio provides excellent communication opportunities to people who
otherwise find themselves constrained by physical limitations. Handi-Hams,
founded in 1967, is a specialty organization dedicated to providing tools that
make ham radio accessible to hams with disabilities of all sorts. Handi-Hams
helps those people turn disabilities into assets through ham radio.
Handi-Hams not only helps hams with disabilities reach out to the rest of the
world, but also helps its members link up with other members and to various
helpful services. Even if you’re not disabled, Handi-Hams may be a welcome
referral to someone you know or you may want to volunteer your services to
Handi-Hams. The Handi-Hams Web portal provides links to an extensive set of
resources at www.handihams.org.

AMSAT
AMSAT (short for Amateur Radio) is the international organization that helps
coordinate satellite launches and oversees the construction of its own satel­
lites. Radio operation through a satellite is a lot easier than you may think, as
you can find out in Part IV.
Yes, Virginia, there really are Amateur Radio satellites up there whizzing through
the heavens! The first one, launched in 1962, sent a Morse code beacon consist­
ing of the letters “HI” (in Morse code speak, “di-di-di-dit, di-dit”), known as the
telegrapher’s laugh. Nowadays, more than 20 satellites are in orbit. The first,
OSCAR-1 (Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio), was about the size of a
large coffee can. Modern satellites, such as the AO-40 shown in Figure 3-3, are
full-sized and full-featured. The satellite pictured provides communications on
several amateur UHF and microwave bands.
You can find the AMSAT Web site at www.amsat.org. The list of links at the
bottom of the page is where you find information on the organization and
membership.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group

Figure 3-3:
Amateur
satellite
AO-40.

TAPR
Another acronym, TAPR stands for Tucson Amateur Packet Radio (www.tapr.
org), which has been a force in digital communications development for
more than 20 years. TAPR has been instrumental in bringing modern digital
communications technology to ham radio. In return, TAPR members created
several innovative communication technologies that are now commonplace
beyond ham radio, such as the communications system known as packet radio,
which is widely used in industry and public safety. More recently, TAPR mem­
bers have been instrumental in implementing modern digital communications,
such as networking and spread-spectrum technology, as shown in Figure 3-4. If
you have a strong computer background, TAPR is likely to have activities that
pique your interest.

Young Ladies’ Radio League — the YLRL
The YLRL (Young Ladies’ Radio League) was founded in 1939 and is dedicated
to promoting ham radio to women, encouraging YL (young lady) activity on the
air, promoting women’s interests within the hobby, and providing an organiza­
tion for female hams.

39

40

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?

Figure 3-4:
TAPR is at
the forefront
of amateur
digital
technology.

YLRL is an international organization with chapters in many countries, hosting
conventions and creating opportunities for travel. The YLRL’s home page at
www.ylrl.org provides a list of activities and member services. The YLRL has
a vigorous award program and also sponsors on-the-air nets for members. It
also sponsors on-the-air competitions for YLs and OMs (Old Men, or, in other
words, male operators of any age).

QRP clubs: ARCI, AmQRP, and G-QRP
QRP is ham radio shorthand for low power operating, using just a few watts of
power to span the oceans. Like bicyclists among the motorists, QRP enthusi­
asts emphasize skill and technique, preferring to communicate with a minimum
amount of power. The largest U.S. QRP clubs are the QRP Amateur Radio Club
International, known as QRP ARCI (www.qrparci.org/), and the American
QRP Club, or AmQRP (www.a-qrp.org/). Both have excellent magazines,
such as the QRP Quarterly seen in Figure 3-5, full of construction projects and
operating tips.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group

Figure 3-5:
The QRP
Amateur
Radio Club
Interna­
tional pub­
lishes this
excellent
quarterly.

Many QRP clubs are worldwide, and one of my favorites is the British club,
G-QRP (G is the prefix of call signs in England). You find the G-QRP home page
at www.gqrp.com/. If you like building your own gear and operating with a
minimum of power, check out these clubs and other groups of QRPers.

Online Communities
Just like every other human activity, ham radio has online communities in
which members discuss the various aspects of the hobby. They provide
resources and support, available 24 hours a day. Will these communities
replace ham radio? Not likely; the magic of radio is just too strong. By their
presence, though, they make ham radio stronger by cementing relationships
and adding structure.

41

42

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?

Reflectors
The first online communities for hams were e-mail lists, known as reflectors.
Reflectors are mailing lists that take e-mail from one mailbox and re-broadcast
it to all members. With some list memberships numbering in the thousands,
reflectors get information spread around pretty rapidly. Every ham radio
interest has a reflector.
Table 3-1 presents a number of the larger Web sites that act as hosts for
reflectors. You can browse the directories and decide which list suits your
interests. Be careful you don’t wind up spending all your time on the reflec­
tors and none on the air!

Table 3-1

Hosts and Directories for Ham Radio Reflectors

Host Address or Web Site

Partial List of Topics

www.qth.com

Over 600 topics on radios,
bands, operating, and awards

www.n4kss.net/reflectors.html

ARES, Portable Operation,
Direction Finding

www.contesting.com

TowerTalk, CQ-Contest, Amps,
Top Band (160-meters)

www.ipass.net/teara/reflect.html,
www.columbia.edu/~fuat/cuarc/
mailing-lists.html, www.ac6v.com/
mail.htm

Directories of reflectors
hosted on other sites

The new ham may want to join one of the Elmer e-mail lists that are set up
specifically to answer questions and offer help. To find general and topical
Elmer lists, enter ham radio elmer reflector into a Web search engine and
you can turn up several candidates.
Because my main interests are QRP operating on the HF bands, contesting,
and making long-distance or DX contacts, I subscribe to the QRP reflector, the
CQ-Contest reflector, a couple of the DX reflectors, and the Top Band reflec­
tor about 160-meter operating techniques and antennas. To make things a
little easier on my e-mail box, I subscribe in digest form, which means I get
one or two bundles of e-mail every day instead of many messages. Most
reflectors are lightly moderated and usually close the list to any posts not
from subscribed members, or in other words, spam.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group
The reflectors at Yahoo! Groups (groups.yahoo.com/) offer a little more than
just e-mail distribution. They also offer file storage, a photo display function,
chat rooms, polls, and excellent member management. To take advantage of
these services, you must create a personal Yahoo! profile first. More than 500
ham radio groups on Yahoo!Groups are in the Hobbies section. Some are open
to the public and others require you to subscribe to the list. Log onto Yahoo!
Groups and enter ham radio in the search engine to find them.
As soon as you settle into an on-the-air routine, subscribe to one or two
reflectors. Reflectors are also a great way to find out about new equipment
and techniques before you take the plunge and try them yourself.

Newsgroups
The USENET newsgroups encompass a stunning breadth of human interests,
including ham radio. After you subscribe to a newsgroup, you can make any
kind of post; the topics of discussions are wide-ranging.
You have the ability to subscribe to these newsgroups through most e-mail pro­
grams. Some services also manage newsgroup information, such as Google
Groups (groups.google.com/). You can find ham radio topics in both the alt
(eight topics) and rec (two topics) lists and have hundreds of messages every
day. One popular example is the rec.ham-radio.swap group, which is a ham
radio flea market that runs 24/7.
Newsgroups are generally unmoderated and open, so they tend to have a higher
amount of spam and off-topic discussions than the moderated reflectors.
Nevertheless, you can find a lot of excellent information in the newsgroups.

Portals
More than a reflector or meeting site, portals provide a comprehensive set of
services and function as a ham radio home page. They feature news, informa­
tive articles, radio buy-and-sell pages, links to databases, reflectors, and many
other useful services to hams. The best-known portals are eHam.net (www.
eham.net) and QRZ.com (www.qrz.com).
QRZ (the ham radio abbreviation for “Who is calling me?”) evolved from a call
sign lookup service — what used to be a printed book known as a callbook —
to the comprehensive site that you see today. The callbook features are incredi­
bly useful and a number of call sign management functions are on the site. Ham
radio news is the main forum on the home page, but Q&A forums and equip­
ment exchanges are also on the portal.

43

44

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
The eHam.net site evolved from a specialty Web site known as Contesting.
com, which focused on ham radio competitions (now encompassed within
the eHam.net site). The eHam home page is organized around community
functions, operating functions, and resources. You can find real-time links to
a DX-station spotting system (frequencies of distant stations currently on the
air) and the latest solar and ionospheric data that affect radio propagation.
I recommend that you bookmark both of these sites because they have a
lively collection of news and articles along with useful forums and features.
Both are gateways to e-mail reflectors that make subscription easy.

Hamfests and Conventions
Depending on how much you like collecting and bargaining, I may have saved
the best for last. Ah, the hamfest! Hamfests are one of the most interesting
events in ham radio. Imagine an Oriental bazaar crammed with technological
artifacts spanning nearly a century, old with new, small with massive, tubes,
transistors, computers, antennas, batteries . . . I’m worn out just thinking about
it! I love a good hamfest; can you tell?
Hamfests are ham radio flea markets. The primary sellers are individuals
vending treasures from a folding table or a tailgate. You may even find some
commercial vendors. Some hamfests are very small and last only a few hours,
while a few attract thousands over several days. Hamfests may be held indoors
or outdoors.
A ham radio convention has a much broader slate of activities than a hamfest;
it may include seminars, speakers, licensing test sessions, and commercial
vendors. Conventions often include a swap meet along with the rest of the
functions. Conventions often have a theme, such as emergency operations,
QRP or low-power operating, or digital radio transmissions, to name a few.

Finding hamfests
In the United States, the best place you can find hamfests at is the ARRL Web
site (www.arrl.org). At the top of the home page is a Hamfests link, which
takes you to the Hamfest and Conventions page. Search for events by state,
ARRL section, or ARRL division. Over 100 hamfests are usually listed at all
times. Another good source of information is your ARRL Section News (look
for the ARRL Sections link at the top right of the ARRL home page) or club
newsletter. Most populated areas have several good-sized hamfests every
year, even in the dead of winter.

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group
After you have a hamfest in your sights, set your alarm for early Saturday
morning (most are Saturday-only events) and get ready to be there at the
opening bell. Be sure to bring the following things:
 An admission ticket: You need a ticket, sold at the gate or by advance
order through a Web site or e-mail.
 Money: Take cash, because most vendors do not take checks or credit
cards.
 Something to carry your purchases in: Take along a sturdy cloth sack,
backpack, or other bag that can tolerate somewhat grimy, dusty elec­
tronic devices.
 A hand-held or mobile rig: Most hamfests have a talk-in frequency,
which is almost always a VHF or UHF repeater. If you’re unfamiliar with
the area, you can get directions while en route.
If you go with a friend and both of you take hand-held radios, you can
share tips about the stuff you find while walking the aisles.
 Water and food: Don’t count on food being available, but the larger hamfests almost always have a hamburger stand. Rarely is gourmet food on
hand, but expect the same level of quality as that of the concession stands
at a ballgame. Taking along a full water bottle is a good idea.

Buying at hamfests
After parking, waiting, and shuffling along in line, you finally make it inside
the gates. You’re ready to bargain! All hamfests are different, but here are
some guidelines to live by, particularly as a novice hamfest customer:
 If you’re new to ham radio, buddy up with a more experienced ham to
steer you around hamfest pitfalls.
 Most prices are negotiable; more so after lunch, but a good deal goes
quickly. Most vendors are not interested in trades, but you do no harm
by offering.
 Hamfests are good places to buy accessories for your radio, often selling
for a fraction of the manufacturer’s price if separate from the radio.
Commercial vendors of new batteries often have good deals on spare
battery packs.
 Many hamfests now have electricity available so that vendors can demon­
strate equipment. If a vendor refuses to demonstrate a supposedly func­
tional piece of gear, or won’t open up a piece of equipment for inspection,
you may want to move along.

45

46

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?
 Unless you really know what you are doing, avoid antique radios. They
often have quirks that can make using them a pain or require impossibleto-get repair parts.
 Be familiar with the smell of burnt or overheated electronics, especially
transformers and sealed components. Direct replacements may be diffi­
cult to obtain.
 Don’t be afraid to ask what something is. Most of the time, the ham behind
the table enjoys telling you and, even if you don’t buy it, the discussion
may attract a buyer.
 If you know exactly what you are looking for, check the auction Web sites
and radio swap sites, such as www.eham.net, www.qrz.com, and www.
arrl.org/RadiosOnline/, before you attend the hamfest. You can get
an idea of the going price and average condition, so you’re less likely to
get gouged.

Other activities at hamfests
Along with buying and selling, many hamfests also have programs and speak­
ers and even license exam sessions, like small conventions. Look for a flyer
or check the hamfest Web site for information about special services that
may be available.

Finding conventions
You can find out about upcoming conventions in the same places as hamfests.
Conventions tend to be more extravagant affairs than hamfests and may be
advertised in ham radio magazines as well as online. At a convention, the main
focus is on programs, speakers, and socializing. Conventions are usually held
in a hotel.
The two largest ham radio conventions of all are the Hamvention, held in
Dayton, Ohio, in mid-May, and the International Amateurfunk-Ausstellung,
held in Friedrichshafen, Germany, in late June. Dayton regularly draws 25,000
or more and Friedrichshafen nearly that many. Both have mammoth flea mar­
kets, an astounding array of programs, internationally-known speakers, and
you can’t possibly see all of it. If at all possible, you should go to one of them
at least once in your life!
The ARRL National and Division Conventions (listed on the ARRL Web site) are
held in every region of the United States. The Radio Amateurs of Canada also
host a national convention every year. These conventions typically attract a
few hundred to a few thousand and are designed to be family friendly. They

Chapter 3: Finding Other Hams: Your Support Group
also provide a venue for specialty groups to host conferences within the over­
all event. These smaller conferences are where you find extensive programs
on direction finding, QRP, county hunting, wireless networking on ham bands,
and so on.
Some conventions and conferences emphasize one of ham radio’s many facets,
such as DX-ing, VHF and UHF operating, or digital technology. If you are a fan of
a certain mode or activity, treating yourself to a weekend convention is a great
way to meet some of the other hams that share your tastes and discover more
about your interests. Table 3-2 lists a few of the specialty conventions held
around the United States each year.

Table 3-2

Specialty Conventions

Name

Theme

Web Site

Visalia International DX
Convention (hosted alternately
by the Northern and Southern
California Contest Clubs)

DX & Contesting

www.scdxc.org/
visalia/index.html

W9DXCC (hosted by the
Northern Illinois DX
Association)

DX & Contesting

www.w9dxcc.com

Pacific Northwest DX
Convention (rotates between
Seattle, WA; Portland, OR; and
Vancouver, BC, each year)

DX & Contesting

www.wwdxc.org

Southeastern VHF Conference
(hosted by the Southeastern
VHF Society)

VHF, UHF, and
Microwaves

www.svhfs.org

International EME Conference

EME (EarthMoon-Earth)
operating

www.qsl.net/
eme2004

Microwave Update (sponsored
by the Pacific NW VHF Society)

VHF, UHF, and
Microwaves

www.microwave
update.org/

Digital Communications
Conference (hosted by the
ARRL and TAPR)

Digital
Communications

www.tapr.org/
conferences.html

47

48

Part I: What Is Ham Radio All About?

Part II

Wading through
the Licensing
Process

G

In this part . . .

etting a license from (drum roll, please) the Federal
Government (trumpet flourish) sounds daunting, but
getting a license has never been easier. In fact, you don’t
even have to deal with a government agency until your
license shows up in the mail! Ham volunteers do all the
licensing work — teaching, testing, and filing paperwork.
If you can fill out the application for a driver’s license, you
can get a ham radio license.
In this part, you find out all about how hams get their
licenses. Odds are you’ll need an Elmer to guide you along
the way, of course, and I introduce you to Elmer here.
I explain just how the test is conducted, how to study for
it, and how to sign up for a test session. After you pass
(naturally!) I spill the beans about how to find out what
your new call sign is. You can even pick out your own call
sign if you want!

Chapter 4

Figuring Out the
Licensing System
In This Chapter
 Understanding the Amateur Service
 Tackling the licensing classes
 Comprehending call signs
 Volunteer License Examinations

U

nlike some of the other types of radios available to the public, ham
radios can only be used with a license. But how do you get a license?
How much does it cost? Can you obtain different kinds of licenses? Like most
people, you’re probably familiar with the process of getting a license to drive
your car, to fish, or to get married. Ham radio licensing is a little different, but
easy to deal with once you know how it works.
Amateur Radio is one of many different types of radio services that use the
radio waves to communicate. Other services include Broadcast (AM, FM,
TV), Public Safety (police and fire departments), Aviation, and even Radar.
To maintain order on the airwaves, the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) requires that each station be licensed. Stations in all the different ser­
vices must abide by the regulations created by the FCC in order to obtain and
keep their licenses, which give them permission to transmit according to the
rules for that service. That’s what a ham license is — authority for you to
transmit on the frequencies that licensees of the Amateur Radio Service are
permitted to use. This chapter explains the FCC’s licensing system for
Amateur Radio in the United States.

The Amateur Service: An Overview
By international treaty, the Amateur Service in every country is a licensed
service. That is, a government agency has to approve the application of

52

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
every ham to transmit. Although regulation seems a little quaint given all of
the communications gadgets for sale these days, licensing is necessary for
a couple of reasons:
 It allows amateurs to communicate internationally and directly, without
using any kind of intermediate system that regulates their activities.
 Because of the power and scope of Amateur Radio, hams need a mini­
mum amount of technical and regulatory background so they can co­
exist with other radio services, such as broadcasting.
By maintaining the quality of licensees, licensing helps ensure that the
Amateur Service makes the best use of its unique citizen access to the air­
waves. Amateur Service sets ham radio apart from the unlicensed services
and is recognized in the FCC rules as the Basis and Purpose of the Amateur
Radio Service, rule 97.1:
 Recognition of ham radio’s exceptional capability to provide emergency
communications (rule 97.1(a))
 Promote the amateur’s proven ability to advance the state of the radio
art (rule 97.1(b))
 Encourage amateurs to improve their technical and communications
skills (rule 97.1(c))
 Expand the number of trained operators, technicians, and electronics
experts (rule 97.1(d))
 Promote the amateur’s unique ability to enhance international goodwill
(rule 97.1(e))
Pretty heady stuff, eh? Ham radio does all these good things in exchange for
radio space among the commercial and government users. You can find all
the rules for Amateur Radio at wireless.fcc.gov/rules.html (click the
Part 97 link for the Amateur Radio rules). Plain English discussion of the rules
is available on the ARRL Web site at www.remote.arrl.org/FandES/field/
regulations/rules-regs.html or in the ARRL’s FCC Rule Book.

Frequency allocations
To keep order in the growing radio communications field, countries got
together in 1932 and formed the International Telecommunication Union
(www.itu.int/home/), based in Geneva, Switzerland. The ITU is not part of
any government, but is a forum for deciding and recording the rules of radio
spectrum usage. The ITU divided the spectrum into small ranges in which

Chapter 4: Figuring Out the Licensing System
specific types of uses occur (see Figure 4-1). These ranges are called
frequency allocations.
The world is divided into three regions, as follows:
 Region 1: Europe, Russia, and Africa
 Region 2: North and South America
 Region 3: Asia, Australia, and most of the Pacific
Within each region, each type of radio service — amateur, military, commercial, and government — is allocated a share of the available frequencies.
Luckily for amateurs, most of their allocations are the same in all three
regions. Figure 4-2 shows the HF range frequencies (from 3 to 30 MHz). This
allocation is very important, particularly on the long-distance bands where
radio signals might propagate all the way around Earth. Talking to someone
in a foreign country is pretty difficult if you don’t use the same frequency!
To get an idea of the complexity of the allocations, browse to the Region 2
allocation chart at www.ntia.doc.gov/osmhome/allochrt.html. (If you
have Adobe Acrobat you can download the entire color chart.) The individual
colors represent different types of radio services. Each service has a small
slice of the spectrum, including amateurs. Can you find the Amateur Service
on the chart? Hint: It’s green.

ITU Region Two

Figure 4-1:
ITU region
map
showing the
world’s
three
telecommunications
administrative regions.

ITU
Region
Three

ITU Region One

ITU
Region
Three

53

54

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
FM
Broadcast Analog
Cell
TV
Phones
Ch 2
30 MHz
300 MHz

AM
Broadcast
300 kHz

3 MHz

MF

Figure 4-2:
Hams are
allocated
ranges of
frequencies
across the
radio
spectrum.

HF

VHF

Digital
Cell
Phones
3 GHz

UHF

The HF Spectrum

3 MHz

Ham “Bands”

14.0 MHz 14.35 MHz
“20-meter Band”

“Dish”
TV

30 GHz

SHF

30 MHz

Other Services

Amateurs have small allocations at numerous places in the radio spectrum and
access to those frequencies depends on the type of license class you possess.
The higher class license that you have, the more frequencies you can use!

Becoming Licensed: Individual
License Classes
By taking progressively more challenging exams, more frequencies and oper­
ating privileges become available to the ham, as shown in Table 4-1. After you
pass a specific test level, called an element, you have permanent credit for it.
This system allows you to progress at your own pace. Your license is good
for a ten-year period and you can renew it without taking an exam.
The ARRL and other organizations publish study guides and manuals. Some
may be available through your local library. (Be sure they are the latest ver­
sion, because the test questions change from time to time.) Online tests are
available with the actual questions that are on the test. By taking advantage
of these materials, you’ll have confidence that you’re ready to pass the exam
on test day.
Three types of licenses are being granted today: Technician, General, and
Amateur Extra.

Chapter 4: Figuring Out the Licensing System
Table 4-1

Privileges by License Class

License Class

Privileges

Notes

Technician

All amateur privileges above
50 MHz

Passing 5 wpm Morse code
test adds the privileges of the
grandfathered Novice class.

General

Technician privileges plus
most amateur HF privileges

Amateur Extra

All amateur privileges

Small sub-bands are added
on 80, 40, 20, and 15 meters.

The Amateur Radio service is undergoing some restructuring as I’m writing
this book. Some requirements, privileges, and even license class names may
change. Be sure that you have the current version of study materials that
reflect the correct rules and regulations.

Technician class
Nearly every ham starts with a Technician-class license, also known as a Tech
license. The Technician licensee is allowed access to all 17 ham bands with
frequencies of 50 MHz or higher. These privileges include operation at the
maximum legal limit and all types of communications. Tech licensees, on the
other hand, may not transmit on the bands below 30 MHz.
The test for this license consists of 35 multiple-choice questions on regula­
tions and technical radio topics. You have to get 26 or more correct to pass.
If you pass a 5-word-per-minute (wpm) Morse code exam, you also receive
some transmitting privileges in segments of four of the traditional shortwave
HF bands, as shown in Table 4-2. You can take the Morse code exam at the
same test session as the written exam or at a later date if you like.

Table 4-2

Additional Privileges with Morse Code Exam

Band

Frequency Privileges

80 meters

3.675–3.725 MHz (Morse code only)

40 meters

7.100–7.150 MHz (Morse code only)

15 meters

21.100–21.200 MHz (Morse code only)

10 meters

28.100–21.300 MHz (Morse code, RTTY, and data);
28.300–28.500 (Voice)

55

56

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
Morse code is required for amateur operation below 30 MHz because of an
international treaty adopted many years ago. At that time, a great deal of
commercial and military radio traffic — news, telegrams, ship-to-ship, and
ship-to-shore messages — was conducted using the code. Back then, using
Morse code was considered a standard radio skill. This part of the treaty
was recently dropped, and Morse code may yet lose its place in amateur
licensing. Nevertheless, Morse code still makes up a great deal of amateur
operations — from casual ragchewing, to passing messages, contests, and
emergency operations. Its efficient use of transmitted power and spectrum
space, as well as its innate musicality and rhythm, make it very popular
with hams.

General class
By passing the 5-wpm Morse code exam and another 35-question written exam,
the doors of Amateur Radio are flung wide open. General class licensees have
full privileges on nearly all amateur frequencies with only small portions of
some HF bands off limits. The General class exam covers many of the same
topics as the Technician exam, but in more detail. Some new topics a more
experienced ham is expected to understand are on the General class exam.
After starting with the entry-level Technician license, most hams today
upgrade to the General class. When you obtain a General class license, you’ve
reached a great milestone. All of the important frequencies on the HF bands
are available to General class licensees.

Amateur Extra class
General class licensees still can’t access everything; the lower segments of
several HF bands are for Extra class licensees only. These segments are
where the expert operators hang out. These segments are prime operating
territory. If you become interested in contesting, contacting rare foreign sta­
tions (DX-ing), or just having access to these choice frequencies, you want
to get your Amateur Extra license, the top level of all license classes.
The Amateur Extra exam consists of 50 multiple-choice questions, 37 of which
you must answer correctly to pass. The exam covers additional rules and reg­
ulations associated with sophisticated operating and several advanced techni­
cal topics. Hams that pass the Amateur Extra exam consider it a real feather in
their caps. Do you think you can climb to the top rung of the licensing ladder?

Chapter 4: Figuring Out the Licensing System

Grandfathered classes
The Amateur Radio Service licensing rules have changed in the past 15 years
to reduce the number of license classes. Hams that hold those licenses in
deleted classes may renew those licenses indefinitely, but no new licenses for
those classes are being issued. Three “grandfathered” license classes exist:
 Novice: The Novice license was introduced in 1951 with a simple 20­
question test and 5-wpm code exam. A General class (or higher ham)
administered the exam. Originally, the license was good only for a single
year, at which point the Novice upgraded or left the air. These days, the
Novice license, like other licenses today, has a ten-year term and is
renewable. Novices are restricted to segments of the 3.5, 7, 21, and 28
MHz amateur bands.
 Technician-Plus: These licensees are just the same as the current
Technician licenses that passed the 5-wpm code test. The only differ­
ence is that a separate formal license class no longer exists.
 Advanced Class: Advanced Class licensees passed an exam midway in
difficulty between those for the General and Amateur Extra classes and
received frequency privileges beyond those for a General, but not as
extensive as an Amateur Extra.
Table 4-3 shows the relative populations of each type of license holder.

Table 4-3

Relative Populations of Each License Class

License Class

Number of Active
Licenses

Percent of Total
Licensees

Technician

277,063

37%

Technician-Plus (grandfathered)

72,467

10%

Novice (grandfathered)

41,114

6%

General

145,275

20%

Advanced (grandfathered)

85,420

12%

Amateur Extra

106,251

15%

Total

727,590

100%

(Source: FCC database, 14 September 2003)

57

58

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process

Understanding Call Signs
Along with your license comes a very special thing — your call sign (or call
to hams), which becomes your on-the-air identity. Each license granted by
the FCC receives a unique call sign. Most hams change call signs once or
twice before settling on one. Sometimes, your call sign starts taking over your
off-the-air identity, too, as you become “Ward, NØAX” with your call sign in
place of a last name. I have ham friends for whom I really have to think hard
to remember their last name! Each letter and number in a call sign is pro­
nounced individually and not as a word, for example “N Zero A X,” not
“No-axe.”
Hams use the Ø symbol to represent the number zero, a tradition from com­
mercial operating practices.
Ham radio call signs around the world are constructed from two parts: the
prefix and the suffix. The suffix of a call sign, when added to the prefix, posi­
tively identifies you. Each call sign is unique. A lot of call signs consist of
NØ and AX, but only one call sign is NØAX.
The prefix is composed of one or two letters and one numeral. For instance,
the prefix in my call sign is NØ. It also identifies the country that issues your
license and may also specify where you live within that country. For U.S. call
signs, the numeral indicates the call district of your license when it was issued.
Mine was issued in St. Louis, Missouri, which is part of the tenth or zero dis­
trict. Suffixes consist of one to three letters. (No punctuation characters are
allowed, just A to Z and Ø to 9.) The suffix in my call sign is AX.
The ITU assigns each country a block of prefix character groups that allows
the government to assign licenses in all of its radio services. U.S. licensees
(not just hams) all have call signs that begin with the letters A, K, N, or W.
Even broadcast stations have call signs such as KGO or WLS. Most Canadian
call signs begin with VE. English call signs may begin with G or M. Germans
use D (for Deutschland), call signs that begin with J are Japanese, and so on.
You can find the complete list of ham radio prefix assignments at www.ac6v.
com/prefixes.htm#PRI.
Whatever class license you have is reflected in your call sign. When you get
your first license, the FCC assigns you the next call sign in the heap for your
license class — in much the same way you’re assigned a license plate at the
DMV. But, also like license plates, you can request special vanity call signs,
within the call sign rules, of course. The higher your license class, the shorter
and more distinctive your chosen call sign can be! Turn to Chapter 7 for more
information on how to find out your call sign.

Chapter 4: Figuring Out the Licensing System
Your call sign is both a certification that you have personally passed the
licensing exam and permission to construct and operate a station — a very
special privilege.

The Volunteer Licensing System
While the processing of commercial and military license applications is han­
dled directly by the FCC, it no longer administers Amateur Radio licensing
examinations. In the United States, ham radio license exams are given by vol­
unteer examiners who are certified by a coordinating organization: the VEC.
This system is typical of the ham tradition of self-policing and self-organizing.
The quality of the examination process is quite high. The flexibility provided
by an all-volunteer system makes taking the test easy for the test-taker as
well as the test-giver. The volunteers handle all of the paperwork and even
file the results with the FCC. The actual license is still granted by the FCC,
however.
In the Olde Days, tests were taken at the “local” FCC office, which could be
hundreds of miles away. I vividly remember making long drives to the govern­
ment office building to take my exams with dozens of other hams. Nowadays,
the tests are usually available a short drive away at a club, school, or even in
private homes. As a volunteer examiner, I’ve given over 30 exams around my
kitchen table for hams as young as 10 years old!

Volunteer Examiner Coordinator (VEC)
The Volunteer Examiner Coordinator (VEC) is the organization that takes
responsibility for coordinating the volunteer examiners who run the exam
sessions and it also processes all of the FCC-required paperwork. The VEC
with the most volunteer examiners is the nationwide group run by the
American Radio Relay League (ARRL-VEC), but 13 other VECs are located
around the United States. You can find a VEC near you at wireless.fcc.
gov/services/amateur/licensing/vecs.html. Some VECs, such as the
ARRL-VEC and W5YI-VEC, operate nationwide, while others work in only
a single region.
The VEC is responsible for preparing and administering the license exams
and other materials. It collects the test results, resolves all discrepancies,
and then files all of the data with the FCC electronically. This process gets
you your license and call sign much faster than if handled by the FCC. New
licensees know their call signs within seven to ten business days from the
time they take the test!

59

60

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
The VECs maintain a list of volunteer examiners (VEs), upcoming test ses­
sions, and other resources for the ham test-taker. The VECs also deal with
more than just exams — they can help you renew your license and change
your address or name.

Volunteer Examiners (VEs)
The volunteer examiners make the system run. Each exam requires that three
VEs are present and all three sign off on the test paperwork. VEs are respon­
sible for all aspects of the testing process, including the meeting space and
announcing the test sessions.
Any licensed amateur can become a VE by contacting one of the VEC organi­
zations and completing whatever qualification process the VEC requires. In
the case of the ARRL-VEC, a booklet on the volunteer licensing system is pro­
vided and the VE applicant must pass a short exam.
VEs are authorized to administer or proctor license exams at the same or
lower class of license they hold themselves. For example, a General class
VE can administer Technician and General exams, but not Amateur Extra.
How much does the exam cost? Under the ARRL-VEC, the current cost of
attending a test session and taking an exam for any of the licensing elements
is $12. If the volunteers incur any expenses, such as for supplies or renting
the facility for testing, they’re allowed to keep up to $6 per person (some
choose to keep none of the fee). The remainder goes to the VEC to cover its
expenses.
VEs are amateurs just like you (or just like you will be) and do a real service
to the amateur community by making the licensing system run smoothly and
efficiently. Don’t forget to say, “Thanks!” at the conclusion of your test ses­
sion, pass or fail. Better yet, become a VE yourself!

Chapter 5

Studying for Your License
In This Chapter
 Breaking down the test
 Finding study resources
 Getting help from a tutor
 Dealing with Morse code

Y

ou’ve decided to take the plunge and get your ham radio license! Con­
gratulations! While you can’t just run down to the store, buy your gear,
and fire it up, becoming licensed is not a terribly difficult process. You can
use a lot of resources as you prepare yourself for the ham radio exam. This
chapter gives you some pointers on how best to make those preparations so
that you enjoy studying and do well at test time.
If you buddy up with a study partner, studying is much easier. Having a part­
ner helps you both stick with it! You each find different things to be easy and
difficult, so you can work together to get through the sticky spots. Best of all,
you can celebrate passing the test together!

Demystifying the Test
In order to do the best job of studying, you need to understand just what the
test consists of and how it’s designed. The tests for all license classes are multi­
ple choice. You won’t find any essay or pictorial questions. No oral questions
of any kind are on the test either — no one asks you to recite the standard pho­
netic alphabet or sing a song about Ohm’s Law.
The test for each license class (except Morse code) is called an element. The
5-words-per-minute Morse code exam, Element 1, tests your ability to receive
Morse code. The written exam for the Technician license is Element 2. The
written exams for General and Amateur Extra licenses are Elements 3 and 4,
respectively.

62

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
During your studies, you’ll encounter questions from the question pool, which
is a large set of actual questions used on the test, all available to the public.
The exam that you take is made up of a random selection of questions from
that pool.
Well, the selection isn’t quite random. The test covers four basic areas:
 Rules & Regulations: Important rules of the road that you have to know
to operate legally
 Operating: Basic procedures and conventions hams follow on the air
 Basic Electronics: Elementary concepts about radio waves and electron­
ics with some very basic math involved
 RF Safety: Questions about how to operate and install transmitters and
antennas safely
The exam has a certain number of questions from each area; these questions
are randomly selected from these areas. The Technician and General tests
have 35 questions, while the Amateur Extra test has 50. If you answer threequarters of the questions correctly, you pass!
Because the exam questions are public, you’ll experience a strong temptation
to just memorize the questions. Don’t! Take the time to understand as much of
the material as you can. When you do get your license, you’ll find that studying
pays off.
To be sure, memorization is required for a couple of areas, such as the lists of
permitted frequencies for each license class. You have to know the exact limits
of your license privileges before you can start operating.

Finding Resources for Study
If you’re ready to start studying, what do you study? Are there books to study?
Videos? Help! Lucky for you, the aspiring ham, numerous study references fit
every taste and capability. Study aids commonly include classes, books, soft­
ware, video, and online help.
Before purchasing any study materials, be aware that the test questions and
regulations change infrequently, but they do change. The latest change was to
the Technician class questions on July 1, 2003. Be sure that any study materials
you purchase include the latest updates. The ARRL Web site shows the dates of
the current question pools at www.remote.arrl.org/arrlvec/pools.html.

Chapter 5: Studying for Your License

Finding licensing classes
If you learn better with a group of other students, you’ll find classes benefi­
cial. You can find classes by:
 Asking at your radio club. You can take classes sponsored by the club.
If you don’t see the class you want, contact the club by e-mail and ask
about classes. If you need to find a club in your area, turn to Chapter 3.
 Looking for upcoming exams to be held in your area. The ARRL Web
site has a search engine devoted to upcoming exams at www.arrl.org/
arrlvec/examsearch.phtml, as does the W5YI test coordinator Web
site (www.w5yi.org).
Get in touch with the exam’s contact liaison and ask about licensing tests.
Because tests are often given at the end of class sessions, these contacts
are frequently class instructors themselves!
 Asking at a ham radio or electronics store. If a ham radio store is in
your vicinity (look in the Yellow Pages under “Electronic Equipment &
Supplies” or “Radio Communication Equipment & Systems”), usually an
associated bulletin board or Web site lists upcoming classes.
Businesses that sell electronic supplies to individuals, such as RadioShack, may also know of classes. In a pinch, you can do a Web search for
ham radio class or radio licensing class (or close variations) plus your
town or region.
Other options for finding classes include local disaster-preparedness organiza­
tions, schools and colleges, which often provide space for classes, and public
safety agencies such as the police and fire departments. By asking around you
can usually turn up a reference to someone involved with ham radio licensing.
Occasionally you see classes advertised that take you from interested party
to successful exam taker in a single weekend! The Technician exam is simple
enough that a focused, concerted effort over a couple of days can cram
enough material into your brain for you to pass the test.
The good part about these sessions is that by committing a single weekend,
you can walk out the door on Sunday night having passed your exam and find
your new call sign in the FCC’s database the following week. For busy folks or
those in a hurry, this time savings is a tremendous incentive.
Remember when you crammed for a final exam overnight and the minute after
you took the exam you forgot everything that was on it? The same phenome­
non applies to the licensing test as well. A lot of information you memorize in
such a short amount of time can fade quickly over time. In two days, you can’t
really absorb the material well enough to permanently understand it. Unlike

63

64

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
high school geometry, you use everything on the test later in real life. That
means you have to really learn it, if not now, then again later. If you have the
time to take a weekly course, that’s the better choice.

Books, software, and videos
Of the available licensing study guide books, the best known guide is the ARRL’s
Now You’re Talking! Aimed at the person studying for a Technician exam, it goes
well beyond presenting just the questions from the question pool; Now You’re
Talking! attempts to really teach the why and how of the material. The ARRL
books are available via www.arrl.org and from numerous retail outlets.
Gordon West WB6NOA has also written a series of licensing guides for all three
license classes. These focus tightly on the pool in a question-and-answer
format and are geared to the student who wants to pass the test quickly, so a
lot of the background present in the ARRL’s book is omitted. Gordon’s books
are sold through various retail outlets such as RadioShack.
In video format, the most detailed packages are the ARRL’s Technician Class
and General Class series of tapes. Each package is professionally prepared and
has three tapes with a study guide. The companion video to the license study
guide by Gordon West is the “No Code Video Seminar.” CQ Magazine (www.cqamateur-radio.com) offers an inexpensive series of Getting Started In videos
that cover various aspects of ham radio. Basic Technology for the Amateur
Radio Enthusiast by Alpha Delta Communications is another introductory video
seminar that helps explain some of the technology involved with radio.
In software, one of the better series is the Ham University CDs, which includes
a Technician licensing course and a Morse code disc. Several of the avail­
able courses have been converted from books to software packages by the
same name.
Figure 5-1 shows some of these resources.

Online
Online resources are numerous, although generally not as thorough as the
book and video courses. Nevertheless, the online practice exams can be partic­
ularly useful. When tutoring students, I urge them to practice the online exams
repeatedly. Because the online exams use the actual questions, it’s almost like
the real thing. Practicing with them reduces your nervousness and gets you
used to the actual format.

Chapter 5: Studying for Your License

Figure 5-1:
A few of
the numer­
ous license
guides and
tutorial
courses
that are
available
as books,
videos,
and CDs.

The sites score your exams and let you know which of the study areas need
more work. When you can pass the online exams by a comfortable margin
every time, you’ll do well in the actual session. You can find online exams at
 www.aa9pw.com/radio/
 www.qrz.com
 www.eham.net
While you’re using the online tests, avoid the temptation to just take them
over and over until you memorize them. Use the online tests as a way to test
your understanding and to become familiar with the test format.

Finding a Mentor
Studying for your license may take you on a journey into unfamiliar territory.
You can easily get stuck at some point — either on a technical concept or
maybe a confusing regulation.

65

66

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process

My Elmer experience
When I started in ham radio, my Elmer was Bill
WNØDYV (now KJ7PC), a fellow high-school
student who had been licensed for a year or so.
I wasn’t having any trouble with the electronics,
but I sure needed a hand with the Morse code
and frequency listings. I spent every Thursday
over at Bill’s house practicing Morse code
(pounding brass) and learning to recognize my

personal nemesis characters: D, U, G, and W.
Without Bill’s help, my path to getting licensed
would have been considerably longer. Thanks,
Bill! Since getting my license, I’ve required the
assistance of several other Elmers as I entered
new aspects of ham radio. If you can count on
the help of an Elmer, the road to a license is
much smoother.

As in many similar situations, the best way to solve a problem is to call on a
more experienced person who can help you over the rough spots. In ham
radio, these friendly mentors are called Elmers.
Rick Lindquist N1RL traces the history of the term Elmer — meaning someone
who provides personal guidance and assistance to would-be hams — to QST
magazine in a March 1971 “How’s DX” column by Rod Newkirk W9BRD. Elmer
didn’t refer to anyone specific; just the friendly, more experienced ham who
was around to help someone get their license and then get on the air. Nearly
every ham has an Elmer at some point.
You won’t get far by putting out a personal ad, but a lot of potential Elmers
are out in Ham Radio Land. You can find Elmers in the following places:
 A ham radio licensing class: Often sponsored by a local ham radio club,
a class is well worth whatever nominal fee, if any, charged just for the
personal instruction you get and the ability to ask questions.
 Radio clubs: Radio clubs can help you find classes or may even host
them. Clubs welcome visitors and often have an introduction session
during the meeting. This session gives visitors an opportunity to say,
“Hi, my name is so-and-so. I don’t have a license yet, but I’m studying
and might need some help.” Chances are, you’ll get several offers of
assistance and referrals to local experts or classes. (Find out more about
clubs in Chapter 3.)
 Online: You can ask questions and help others in their studies on
numerous online sites. Teen Hams at www.youthtech.com/hamradio/
is popular. You can also find a good general-focus chat room at www.
qsl.net/n5sdd/.

Chapter 5: Studying for Your License
 In your community: Many of today’s hams find their Elmers by looking
around their own neighborhoods. Maybe a ham with a tower and
antenna lives near you, or you see a car with a ham radio license plate at
work. If you get the opportunity, introduce yourself and explain that
you’re studying for a license. Chances are that the person you’re talking
to needed an Elmer himself, way back when, and can give you a hand or
help you find one.
After you get your license, you’re in an excellent position to help other new­
comers because you know just exactly how they felt at the start of the jour­
ney. Even if you’re just one step ahead of the person asking the questions,
you can be an Elmer. Some hams enjoy Elmer-ing so much that they devote
much of their ham radio time to the job. You won’t find a higher compliment
in ham radio than “My Elmer.”

Mastering Morse Code
Mastering Morse code is a very personal thing, such as playing an instrument
or achieving a new athletic maneuver. Many people liken it to studying another
language, with the same sudden breakthroughs separated by periods of repeti­
tion. Becoming a skilled Morse code operator results in a great sense of accom­
plishment, and you’ll never regret it.
If you decide to study Morse code, some methods are much better than others.
Avoid any method that encourages you to think of a table of character pat­
terns. Managing the required 5 words per minute while looking up each char­
acter in your mind is difficult. After you can receive code as fast as these
methods permit, you’ll find moving to the higher speeds that make Morse
code fun hard.
The style that most hams are successful with is the Farnsworth Method. The
dits and dahs of each character are sent at the code speed (words per minute)
you want to achieve, but the individual characters are spaced far enough apart
in time (character spacing) so that the overall word speed is low enough for
you to process the character’s sound pattern. For the beginner, a common
sending speed for individual characters is 7 words per minute (wpm), while the
character spacing results in a much lower overall speed for the words.
By sending the characters at the higher speed, you keep from falling into the
look-it-up-in-the-table trap. Thinking of the code as a table of letters in one
column and a dot-dash pattern in another is a natural tendency. When you

67

68

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
hear a sequence of code elements (the dots and dashes), such as short-longlong, you then look it up in your head to find the character “W.” This method
works, but only up to speeds of a few words per minute and it’s a very hard
habit to break.
The Farnsworth method gets you thinking “didahdah” instead of “dot dash
dash.” The former is closer to the actual sound of the character. You then mem­
orize the character as the entire pattern of sounds and not as disconnected ele­
ments. This method keeps you from having to unlearn the table method and
makes progressing to higher speeds easy. Make sure whatever study aid you
choose uses the Farnsworth Method or something similar, such as ARRL and
Gordon West Morse code study tapes and books or the Ham University and
Morse Academy software. (Go to www.ac6v.com/morseprograms.htm for an
encyclopedic listing of Morse code training aids.)
The graph in Figure 5-2 shows the normal progression in code speed. Between
each step, or plateau, you achieve a new skill. While on the plateau, you refine
or solidify the skill. Over time, you can progress from copying letter-by-letter
to hearing whole groups of characters and then words.

Code Speed
(wpm)

10

Hearing words

7
Figure 5-2:
The normal
progression
in code
speed.

5
3

Hearing groups of characters
THE TEST!
Hearing characters as patterns
Looking up the dots and dashes
Time spent learning

A great way to gauge your Morse code proficiency is with live code practice,
which helps freshen up your taped or computer-generated material. The
most widely received code practice sessions are transmitted by the ARRL’s
station W1AW from Newington, Connecticut, on several frequencies at differ­
ent times throughout the day. W1AW transmits bulletins and code practice
daily and through the weekends. You can find a complete W1AW operating

Chapter 5: Studying for Your License
schedule at www.arrl.org/w1aw.html#w1awsked. Code practice may be
available on a VHF or UHF repeater in your area, too. Check with your local
radio clubs to find out.
The most important part of mastering Morse code is to just keep at it. You’ll
have days where conquering new letters and higher speeds just seem to come
effortlessly. Then days come when progress just seems elusive. Those plateaus
are the most important time to keep going because that’s when your brain is
completing its new wiring!
As you discover more code, work it into everyday life. For example, while dri­
ving to work, whistle or hum the code for license plates, billboards, and signs.
Just as you substitute foreign language equivalents for items you use or see as
practice, use the code over and over again to make it familiar.
Soon, you’ll notice yourself effortlessly copying bits and pieces that seemed
impossible only days before. Characters that seemed hopelessly opaque
become as natural as speech. Trust me — the 5 wpm you need to pass the
test is within your grasp if you’re willing to give it a try.

69

70

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process

Chapter 6

Taking the Test
In This Chapter
 Searching for a test session
 Registering for a test
 The Big Day

A

fter your diligent studies, you find yourself easily passing the online
tests by a comfortable margin. Maybe you’ve been copying Morse code
for a while and those 5-words-per-minute sessions are starting to seem a little
slow. Now you’re ready to (drumroll, please) . . . take the test!

If you are part of a class or study group, then the test may be part of the
planned program. In this case, you’re all set — just show up on time. Skip to
the section, “The Big Day.” If you are studying on your own, however, this
chapter tells you where and when you can take the test.

Finding a Test Session
Lucky for you, finding a schedule of test sessions in your area is pretty easy.
You can find the FCC Web site’s list of organizations that serve as Volunteer
Examiner Coordinators (VECs) in the different regions of the United States at
wireless.fcc.gov/services/amateur/licensing/vecs.html#vecs.
If a VEC in the list is close to you, start by contacting the organization. Many
of the VECs have a Web site and every one has an e-mail contact. Visit the
Web site or send an e-mail that says, “Hello, my name is . . . and I want to take
the Technician (or General or Amateur Extra) class license exam. Please send
me a list of examination sites and dates. I live in. . . . ”

72

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
If you don’t see a nearby VEC or if no exams are scheduled at times or
places suitable to you, you can find an exam with one of these VEC national
organizations:
 ARRL VEC exams: The ARRL VEC operates nationwide and you can
search for exams based on your zip code at www.arrl.org/arrlvec/
examsearch.phtml, shown in Figure 6-1.
 W5YI VEC exams: Like the ARRL, the W5YI VEC (founded by Fred Maia
W5YI) operates nationwide. You can find a list of certified examiners to
contact at www.w5yi.org/vol-exam.htm.
 W4VEC VEC exams: The W4VEC (the call sign of the Volunteer Examiners
Club of America) covers the Midwest and southern states and provides a
list of dates and locations at www.w4vec.com/ar.html.
If you still can’t find a convenient exam for you, your final option is to write or
e-mail the VEC organizations at the addresses on the FCC Web site (wireless.
fcc.gov/services/amateur/licensing/vecs.html#vecs) and ask for
help. The mission of these organizations is to help prospective amateurs get
a license. No matter where you live, they can put you in touch with examiners
so that you can take your test.

Figure 6-1:
The ARRL
exam
search
page.

Chapter 6: Taking the Test

Signing Up for a Test
After you find a test session, you need to contact the test session hosts or spon­
sors to let them know that you are attending the session and what test elements
you want to take. Checking in ahead of time is not only good manners, but can
alert you to time or location changes. Some sessions do not allow unannounced
attendees, or walk-ins, so be sure to contact the test sponsor first.

Public exams
Most exam sessions are open to the public and are held at schools, churches,
or other public meeting places. Nearly all test sessions are open to walk-ins —
that is, you can just show up unannounced, pay your test fee, and take the
test — but some require an appointment or reservation. Checking first,
before you show up, is always a good idea.
Call or e-mail the session’s contact person to confirm the date, get directions,
and let him or her know what tests you need to take.

Exams at events
Test sessions held at public events are very popular ways to take a test. Finding
exam sessions being held at hamfests and conventions is very common. (See
Chapter 3 for information on these events.) These sessions can attract dozens
of examinees and often fill up quickly. Some exams are often given more than
once throughout the day, so you can take more than one test or can spend time
enjoying the event. As a test-taker, the FCC says you should not be required
to pay for attendance at the event just to take license exams, but you may
encounter a special entry fee. Don’t be afraid to call ahead and ask!
If you attend an event-sponsored exam, getting to the site early and register­
ing is a good idea. There may likely be multiple sessions and the tests for dif­
ferent elements may only be given at specific times.

Private exams
While the lion’s share of tests are given at public exam sessions, smaller ses­
sions may be held in a private residence, especially for a rural and small-town
testing facility. For example, since 1990, most of the new hams in my commu­
nity have passed their exams while sitting at my kitchen table!

73

74

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
When taking a test at a session in a private residence, please call ahead to
ensure room for you at the session and the examiners can prepare to admin­
ister the exam you want to take. You are a guest in someone’s home, so act
accordingly.

The Big Day
In the so-called Good Old Days, the higher-class license exam sessions were
conducted in federal office buildings by FCC employees. I vividly recall stand­
ing in line with dozens of other hams waiting for my shot at a new license.
Some of us drove for hours to reach the FCC office or test location, nervously
reviewing the material or listening to code tapes between swallows of coffee.
Inside, a steely-eyed examiner watched over us as our pencils scratched out
the answers.
These days, the exams are certainly more conveniently offered and the exam­
iners friendlier, but that doesn’t lessen your nervous anticipation as the day
arrives. The best way to do well, of course, is to be prepared. That means in
all aspects of the exams, not just the questions. The more you know, the less
you have to worry about.

What to bring with you
In each test session, the three basic steps are
1. Register for your exam.
2. Take the test.
3. Complete your paperwork (which I talk about in Chapter 7).
The examiners guide you through each step.
When coming to a test session, be sure to bring the following, whether you’re
licensed or not:
 Two forms of identification, including at least one photo ID, such as a
drivers license or employer’s identity card
 Your Social Security number (SSN)

Chapter 6: Taking the Test
If you have a license and are taking an exam to upgrade to a higher class, you
also need to bring
 Your current original license and a photocopy
 Any original CSCE you have and a photocopy
CSCE is an acronym for Certificate of Successful Completion of Examina­
tion. This certificate is your record of having passed one or more exami­
nations. If you have just passed the Technician exam (Element 2), to get
on the air you have to wait for the FCC to grant you a call sign. For any
other license changes, the CSCE allows you to operate immediately with
your new privileges.
 If you have one, you can substitute your FCC Licensee Number (CORES
or FRN) for your Social Security number. (See Chapter 7.)
Along with your identification and any documents, also bring a couple of
pencils and a calculator. You aren’t permitted to use any kind of online device
or a computer during the written exam unless you have a disability. (And you
need to first coordinate the use of supporting devices with the test adminis­
trators.) If you bring scratch paper, it needs to be completely blank. For copy­
ing code, if you plan to use a typewriter, keyboard, or computer, let the test
session administrators know in advance.
When you arrive at the test session, you sign in with your name, address, and
call sign, if you have one. The test administrators review any identification
and documents you have. You pay the test fee (currently $12 at exams
through the larger VECs) and then you are ready to take the exam!

Taking the written exam
The time for the test is finally here. You’ve shown up and you’ve signed in.
Now what? When do you start? Well, that depends on how many people are
signed up ahead of you and how many different types of tests are given. In a
small session, you may start the test immediately. In a larger session, you
may have to wait a while until your turn comes. Each written test takes from
15 to 45 minutes; code tests are shorter. The session may be organized so
that everyone starts and stops together or the testing may be continuous.
The examiner explains the process for your session.
As I discuss in Chapter 5, the written tests are multiple-choice tests. You
receive a pamphlet containing the test questions and an answer sheet for
recording your choices.

75

76

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
Follow these sure-fire tips to help you turn that tiger of a test into a pussycat
by keeping your thinker in top shape:
 Don’t: Take the test when you’re hungry, sleepy, or thirsty.
 Do: Wear a couple layers of clothing to make yourself comfortable what­
ever the room temperature, and visit the restroom before the session
starts.
 Don’t: Drink extra coffee or tea, but do take a vitamin or drink fruit juice.
 Do: Follow the directions for completing the identification part of your
answer sheet, even though you may want to start the test right away.
 Do: Study a question that seems really difficult, and then move on to the
next one. When you come back to the question later, it may seem crystal
clear.
 Don’t: Guess, unless it’s your only option. Generally, your first choice is
always your best choice. Unless you are quite sure, don’t change your
answers.
 Do: Completely erase the wrong answer or indicate clearly that you made
a change if you change any answers.
 Do: Remember to breathe and take a minute to stretch, roll your head,
or flex your arms and legs.
 Do: Double-check your answers before handing in your test to make sure
you marked the answer you wanted.
When you’re done with your exam, follow the administrator’s instructions for
turning in your paper, sit back, and try to exhale! Depending on the size of the
session, you may have to wait several minutes for the administrator to grade
your paper. At lease three Volunteer Examiners (VEs) verify the grades on all
exams. Written exams require a score of 75 percent or better to pass. You pass
code exams by either copying 25 characters in a row (numbers and punctua­
tion count as two characters) or by correctly answering eight of ten questions
about the text that is sent.
In all probability, because you studied hard and seriously, you get a big smile
and a thumbs-up from the test graders! Way to go! You can finally, truly relax
and move on to the next stage.
If you didn’t make it, don’t be disheartened. Many sessions allow you to take
a different version of the test as a second chance, if you want, both for code
and for written exams. Even if you don’t take the exam again right away, you
now know the ropes of a test session and you’ll be more relaxed next time.
Don’t let a failure stop you! Many hams make more than one attempt to pass
a test and they are on the air today.

Chapter 6: Taking the Test

Passing the Morse code test
The Morse code test is very basic: You listen to five minutes of code from a
tape or computer and write down (copy) what characters you hear. The test
goes something like this:
1. The VE starts the tape or computer and you get one minute of practice
code before the real test begins.
Be sure that you can hear the code generator clearly and let the test
administrator know if you can’t. Sometimes strong echoes interfere with
the code, so don’t be afraid to have the equipment adjusted or move
around until you can hear clearly. Take advantage of this time to relax
and get comfortable. Don’t worry if you don’t copy the practice minute
well, use the practice to get rid of your jitters.
2. Verbal instructions are given for the actual test code by the VE or
from the test tape.
Follow the instructions carefully despite the adrenaline coursing through
your veins.
3. Six V characters (meaning Test) are sent.
4. The actual test begins and continues for at least five minutes.
The code contains mostly text, including punctuation and numbers. The
text used for the ARRL-VEC exam is a sample contact with call signs and
typical information, such as signal report, location, operator’s name, and
type and power of equipment and antennas. In short, it’s very represen­
tative of the type of code you hear on the air.
For other code exams, the text may be anything from plain English to
random groups of characters, so you may want to check with the exam­
iners first to avoid surprises.
5. The volunteer examiners (VEs) evaluate your test paper.
You can pass the test in one of two ways:
You capture one minute of solid copy — 25 characters in a row
(numbers and punctuation count for two characters), excluding
spaces. Most of the students that I examine pass the test this way.
Answer eight out of ten questions about the contact you overheard.
Like written exams, you can take some easy steps to make your Morse test
easier.

77

78

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
 Don’t: Practice at very high or very low speeds, stay just a little faster
than the test speed.
 Do: Have at least one spare pen or pencil ready to pick up and use.
 Don’t: Scribble out or erase any miscopied characters, just make a
single line through them like THIS.
 Do: Leave an underscore when you miss a character, like __ this,
because you may recognize the word as you copy more letters. Making
the underscore for each missed character keeps you in the rhythm until
you get back on track.
 Don’t: Panic when you miss a character. Take a deep breath and focus
on an upcoming character.

Chapter 7

Obtaining Your License
and Call Sign
In This Chapter
 Filling out your paperwork
 Watching for your call sign
 Choosing your own call sign
 Keeping your license valid

A

fter you pass your exam, only a small matter of paperwork separates
you from your new license. Your exam session volunteers help you com­
plete everything correctly and even send your paperwork in to the FCC for
you. You still need to understand what you’re filling out, though; that’s what
I cover in this chapter. Fill your paperwork out correctly and you won’t delay
the process of getting your call sign.

Completing Your Licensing Paperwork
After you successfully complete the exam, you need to fill out two forms:
 The first form you fill out is the CSCE (Certificate of Successful
Completion of Examination).
Figure 7-1 shows the ARRL VEC CSCE. The VEC and FCC use the CSCE as
a check against the test session records. Your copy of the completed
form is documentation of your test credit and is used to show credit for
the exam you passed at any other test session before you receive your
license or upgrade from the FCC. Keep your copy of the CSCE until the
FCC sends you a new license or records the change in its database. You
probably want to hang on to it as a record of your achievement.

80

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process

Figure 7-1:
The ARRL
VEC CSCE.

 The second form you fill out is the NCVEC Form 605.
NCVEC Form 605 allows the FCC to process your new license. Whenever
you get a new license, upgrade to a higher class, renew your license,
change your name or address, or pick a new call sign, you use this form.
You can also submit name, address, or call sign changes directly to the
FCC by mail or online.
The volunteer examiners running the session send in your CSCE and NCVEC
Form 605 to the certifying VEC organization. Asking your examiners about the
average wait before the FCC updates your information in its database is a
good idea, but on average, you wait about seven to ten business days.
If you’re upgrading an existing license, you can go home and use those new
privileges right away. You have to add suffixes to your call sign to note that
you qualified for your new privileges. When your new license comes in the
mail or your new license class is recorded in the FCC database, you can drop
the temporary suffix. These new suffixes are the following:
 A General license adds /AG to your call sign on Morse code, and slash
AG or temporary AG on voice.
 An Amateur Extras license adds /AE to your call sign on Morse code, and
slash AE or temporary AE on voice.

Chapter 7: Obtaining Your License and Call Sign
Don’t forget that you’re required to maintain your current mailing address on
file with the FCC. If you move residences or if your address changes, keep the
FCC database up to date. Mail sent to the address in the FCC database should
get to you in ten days or less. Your license is good only for ten years, so you
eventually have to fill out another Form 605 to renew it.

Finding Your New Call Sign
After you complete the test session and your paperwork is sent to the VEC,
you can begin watching the FCC database for your new call sign to appear.
After your call sign appears with your name beside it, you can get on the air
even if you don’t have the paper license.
The FCC has an online licensee information system called ULS (Universal
Licensing System), shown in Figure 7-2. Each licensee has a Federal
Registration Number, or FRN, that serves as identification within the FCC. I
outline the process of registering for your own FRN in the section
“Registering with the FCC Online.”

Figure 7-2:
The FCC’s
ULS Web
page.

81

82

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
The database that really counts is the one maintained by the FCC. Follow
these steps to find your call sign online:
1. Log on to wireless2.fcc.gov/UlsApp/UlsSearch/
searchLicense.jsp.
The FCC’s Universal Licensing System (ULS) Web page loads (see
Figure 7-3).
2. Click the Amateur link in the Service-Specific column in the middle
of the page.
The Search form appears.
3. Enter your last name in the Name box and zip code in the Zip Code
box in the Licensee section of the form, and then click the Submit
button.
You may wait a few seconds for the information to come up while
your request is processed. Figure 7-4 shows the results for Silver and
98070 — my whole family is licensed!
4. Browse through the results.
If the results take up more than one page, click the Query Download link
above the results to have the entire batch of results compiled into a
single text file.

Figure 7-3:
The FCC’s
ULS
Amateur
License
Search
page.

Chapter 7: Obtaining Your License and Call Sign

Figure 7-4:
The search
results bring
up everyone
in my family.

Feel free to browse through the database. Seeing how many hams have the
same last name as you, or how many are in your zip code is fun. By using a
little creative investigating in the Amateur License Search page, you can dis­
cover some interesting things about the ham population in your area.

What if I don’t see my call sign?
Patience is difficult while you’re waiting, but be
sure to wait for at least one full calendar week
before getting worried. If two weeks pass, then
you can take some action.
 Contact the leader of the exam session and
ask if the VEC accepted your paperwork
and sent it to the FCC. Due to some problem,
a delay may have happened in getting the
session results accepted. This is rare; don’t
worry.

 If the paperwork went through okay and
it’s been more than ten business days (or
longer than the usual wait for the VEC that
coordinated your session), ask the session
leader to inquire about your paperwork. The
VEC can trace all applications to the FCC.
In more than ten years of being a session
leader, I have never experienced any lost or
delayed paperwork.

83

84

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
Most of the information you submit with your license application is a part of
the FCC database and is available to the public along with your FRN, if you
have one. When you submit your application, you agree to identify yourself
as a licensed ham and state where your fixed station (a station that doesn’t
move) is located. The FCC does not make your Social Security number, phone
number, or e-mail address available to the public.
In addition to the FCC Web site, you can also search other Web sites that
search the FCC database:
 QRZ.com (www.qrz.com): The best-known ham radio Web site; just type
the call sign into the Get Callsign search box at the top left-hand corner
of the page. If you don’t know the call sign, or prefer to search for a
name, click the Name Search link in the Get Help area on the left. When
the Name Search page loads, type your name, city, or zip code into the
Search box. The information you get from this search comes directly
from the FCC database. You can also search for non-U.S. hams if the data
from their country is available online.
 ARRL (www.arrl.org/fcc/fcclook.php3): Type your last name and
zip code and click the Submit Query button for results.

Registering with the FCC Online
The FCC has done a lot of work to make ordinary license transactions easier
to accomplish by creating the online Universal Licensing System (ULS). The
functions you can perform here include renewals, address changes, and other
simple services. To use this system, though, you need to register in CORES,
the Commission Registration System, whether or not the FCC has granted
your license.
To register, you supply a TIN (Taxpayer Identification Number), which is your
Social Security number, and you receive an FRN (Federal Registration
Number) that is your personal identification with the FCC for any license you
obtain. Each call sign is linked to a Licensee ID (the identification of the indi­
vidual or organization that applied for the license). After you have your FRN,
you can link your FRN with any call signs you hold.
Follow these steps to register with ULS/CORES as an individual Amateur
licensee:
1. Browse to wireless.fcc.gov/uls/.
The Universal License System Web page appears.

Chapter 7: Obtaining Your License and Call Sign
2. Click the CORES/Call Sign button.
3. Select one of the following options and click the Continue button:
• Register Now: Select this option if this is your first time in the
Universal Licensing System.
• Update Registration Information: If you need to change any info
from the last time you were in the system, select this option.
• Update Call Sign/ASR Information: Choose this option if you need
to add or remove any of your call signs from the list that you asso­
ciated with your FRN. (Hams rarely use this option.)
4. Select the An Individual option and the location of your contact
address, and then click the Continue button.
5. Enter your name and address. Telephone and fax numbers and e-mail
addresses are optional.
Any field marked with an asterisk is a required field.
Everything you enter but your Social Security Number is available for
public inspection. The FCC also keeps all telephone numbers and e-mail
addresses private.
6. If you are registering for the first time, enter your Social Security
number.
You’re required to provide this information (or give a reason why you
can’t). You must enter your SSN without any spaces, hyphens, or peri­
ods. Ignore any prompts or windows asking for an SGIN. (SGIN stands for
a Sub-Group Identification Number and is used by managers of large
communications services with many call signs. You don’t need a SGIN.)
7. At the bottom of the window, enter a password of 6 to 15 characters
(or have the system pick one for you). Then re-enter it in the Re-enter
Password box.
When selecting passwords, using your call sign in any way is not a good
idea because an unauthorized person would try it as your password
immediately. The same principle applies to your spouse’s name, birth
date, or any other personal information.
8. Enter something that personally identifies you as being you in the
Hint box.
If you ever forget your password and want the FCC to tell you what it is,
this hint verifies you are who you are and not someone else. The per­
sonal identifier information could be your mother’s maiden name or you
can pick any word or words that fit in the window.
9. Click the Submit button.

85

86

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
10. Correct any errors.
At this point, the ULS lists any errors you made, such as omitting a
required item or adding the wrong type of information for a particular
field. If any errors are listed, go back and correct them, and then click
the Submit button again.
The window now displays a form with your licensee information, as well
as your Licensee ID Number, personal identifier, and password. Print this
information and keep a copy in case you forget your password.
You are now a registered person with the FCC. Follow these steps to associ­
ate your call sign with your FRN:
1. Click the FCC Universal Licensing System link at the bottom of the
page that confirmed your information.
2. Click the Call Sign/ASR Registration link.
A window with your FRN already entered loads.
3. Enter your password in the Password box and click the Continue
button.
4. Click the Enter Call Signs link.
The Enter Call Signs window loads.
5. Enter your call sign in the first space provided and click the Submit
button.
Congratulations! You and your call sign are now registered with the FCC.
Numerous services are available to you for free!

Picking Your Own Call Sign
You can pick your very own call sign, within certain limits, of course.
But if you’re the sort of person who likes having a license plate that says
“IMABOZO” or “UTURKEY,” you’ll enjoy picking a call sign from the
available list.
Occasionally, you hear a call sign consisting of one letter, one numeral, and
one number. These 1-by-1 call signs are granted on a temporary basis to U.S.
hams for expeditions, conventions, public events, and all sorts of noteworthy
activities. The special call sign program is administered by several of the
VEC organizations for the FCC. More information is available at www.remote.
arrl.org/arrlvec/1x1.html.

Chapter 7: Obtaining Your License and Call Sign

Ham radio license plates
You can also acquire a license plate with your
call sign. The process is easy and many states
even have a special type of vanity plate just
for hams. Contact your local Department of
Motor Vehicles and ask! For additional informa­
tion see www.arrl.org/FandES/field/
regulations/local/plates.html.

One wrinkle for hams with call signs that con­
tain the Ø character: In most states, you have to
request the slashed zero specially. Talk to the
clerk that handles your form and show him or
her your license. The slashed zero should be
available for ham license plates.

Depending on your license class, you can select any available call sign in
the groups listed in Table 7-1.

Table 7-1

Call Signs Available by License Class

License Class

Types of Available Call Signs

Technician and General

2x3; with a prefix of KA-KG, KI-KK, KM-KO, KR­
KZ, and a suffix of any three letters
1x3; with a prefix of K, N, or W, and a suffix of
any three letters

Amateur Extra

2x3; with a prefix of KA-KG, KI-KK, KM-KO, or
KR-KZ, and a suffix of any three letters
2x1; with a prefix beginning with A, K, N, or W,
and any letter in the suffix
1x2; with a prefix of K, N, or W, and any two let­
ters in the suffix
1x3; with a prefix of K, N, or W, and a suffix of
any three letters

Novice (no new licenses
being issued)

2x3; with a prefix of KA-KG, KI-KK, KM-KO, or
KR-KZ, and a suffix of any three letters

Advanced (no new licenses
being issued)

2x2; with a prefix of K or W, and a suffix of any
three letters

Needless to say, the shorter call signs and ones that seem to spell words
are highly sought after. Many hams enjoy having a call made up of their

87

88

Part II: Wading through the Licensing Process
initials. Whatever your preference, you’ll likely find a vanity call sign that
works for you.
You can find available call signs by using the FCC’s ULS call sign search func­
tions, but that can be quite cumbersome because it’s designed to return
information on only one call sign at a time. The following Web sites offer
better and more flexible call sign search capabilities:
 N4MC’s Vanity HQ (www.vanityhq.com/): By using N4MC’s Web site,
you can quickly determine whether call signs are available for
assignment.
 WM7D Callsign.net Callsign Database (www.wm7d.net/fcc/callsign.
html): This site includes a good search function that allows wildcard
characters, which speeds up your search for that perfect call sign.
 Vanity Call Sign Search (www.amateur-radio.org/vanity.htm): This
basic site has a good selection of search-and-sort features and links to
other vanity call sign Web sites.
After you select a vanity call sign, you can then follow the vanity call applica­
tion process described at www.arrl.org/arrlvec/vanity.html. You need
to provide a list of one or more call signs that you like. All the call signs must
be unassigned and available — that’s what you use the vanity call Web sites
for. Then you fill out the necessary application online and either pay the
$16.30 fee via credit card or by check.

Maintaining Your License
The FCC’s ULS has a specific section for the Amateur Radio Service that you
can find at wireless.fcc.gov/services/amateur/licensing/filing.
html. The ULS is the place to go if you want to do any of the following:
 Renew your license
 Change any of the address information associated with the license,
such as name or address
 Replace your physical license
 Check on an application
 Apply for a vanity call sign
Checking out this page when you first earn your license is a good idea so that
you are familiar with it when you need to take care of any licensing business.

Part III

Hamming It Up

I

In this part . . .

n this part, you find out about the real ham radio:
making contacts. I start by showing you how (and
where and when) to make contacts and what they usually
consist of. I show you how to use those cool handheld
radios that everybody seems to have as well as how to
pound brass — ham speak for Morse code.
Ham radio also comes through when the chips are down
in emergencies, natural disasters, and just providing
public service. Definitely read these sections just to famil­
iarize yourself with the emergency-related possibilities —
even better, join in.
Many amazing activities take place on the ham bands
every day, including round-the-world DX-ing, making
contacts through amateur satellites, using your computer
to send and receive data using a radio, taking place in
on-the-air competitions, even having your own amateur
TV station!

Chapter 8

Making Contact
In This Chapter
 Listening on different bands
 Finding the right signal
 Interpreting a contact
 Making a call

W

hen you have your ham radio (rig) set up and a license from the FCC
(ticket) clearing you for takeoff, you’re ready to make your first con­
nection. If this thought makes your palms a little sweaty, don’t worry; all
hams start out feeling just that way and survive. You will, too.

In this chapter I show you how to make a contact and I cover the basics of onthe-air manners and the simple methods that make contacts flow smoothly.
With a little preparation, you’ll feel comfortable and confident, ready to get on
the air and join the fun.

Listen, Listen, Listen!
The most important part of successfully putting a contact, also known as a
QSO, in your logbook is listening. In fact, your ears are the most powerful
part of your station! The ham bands are a 24-hour-a-day party with people
coming and going all the time. And just like when you walk in to a big party,
you need to size up the room by tuning the band (listening at different fre­
quencies to assess activity) or monitoring (listening to an ongoing contact or
conversation) for a while before jumping in. By listening, you discover who’s
out there and what they’re doing, what the radio conditions are like, and the
best way for you to make contact.

92

Part III: Hamming It Up

Listening on the different bands
Operating on the shortwave or HF bands has a different flavor from the VHF
bands. On the HF bands, you can find stations on any frequency that offers
them a clear spot for a contact. Up on the VHF bands, most contacts take place
using repeaters on specific frequencies or channels spaced regularly by a few
kHz. How are you supposed to figure out where the other hams hang out?
HF, or High Frequency, bands cover 3 to 30 MHz and are usually thought of as
the shortwave bands. VHF, or Very High Frequency, bands cover from 30 to
300 MHz. UHF, or Ultra High Frequency, bands cover 300 MHz to 3 GHz.
Repeaters are radios that listen on one frequency and retransmit what they
hear on another frequency. Repeaters are usually in high spots such as hill­
tops or on tall towers so they can hear weak signals well and they have power­
ful transmitters so that they can be heard for a long distance. Repeaters allow
weak portable and mobile stations to communicate with each other over a
wide area. Repeaters are most useful on VHF and higher frequency bands.
On both HF and VHF, hams engage in specific activities and tend to congregate
on or near specific frequencies. For example, low-power (or QRP) aficionados
are often on the 20-meter band near 14.060 MHz. No rule says they must oper­
ate on that frequency, but they gather there routinely anyway. Having that kind
of consistency provides a convenient way to meet others with similar interests.
To continue my party metaphor, it’s the same as learning from another partygoer, “A group is talking about jazz at that table in the corner.” Whenever
groups tend to congregate at particular frequencies, those frequencies are
known as calling frequencies.

Understanding sub-bands and band plans
In the United States, specific regulations exist about where each type of signal
transmits in a given band. These signals are called sub-bands. Figure 8-1 shows
the sub-bands for the 80-meter band. The American Radio Relay League (ARRL)
offers a handy chart showing the sub-bands on its Web site at www.arrl.org/
FandES/field/regulations/bands.html.
Outside the United States, regulations are much less restrictive. For example,
you’ll probably hear Canadian and overseas hams having voice contacts in a
part of the band where American hams don’t have phone transmitting privi­
leges. (Phone is an abbreviation for radiotelephone, which includes all voice
modes of transmission.) How unfair! Because of the number of American
hams, the FCC long ago decided that to maintain order, segregating the widebandwidth phone signals from narrow-bandwidth code and data signals is
necessary. That’s just the way it is. So close and yet so far!

Chapter 8: Making Contact
80-Meter Band Privileges
Extra
Class
CW

Novice
Band

3.675

Extra Advanced
Class Class
'Phone 'Phone

3.725

3.525

3.850

Novice &
Tech with CW

3.775
General
Advanced

Figure 8-1:
The 80­
meter band
sub-band
plan.

Extra
3.500 MHz

3.750 MHz

4.000 MHz

Beyond this segregation of the amateur bands, amateurs have collectively orga­
nized themselves in order to organize the different operating styles on each
band. Not all amateur users can co-exist on the same frequency, so having
agreements about where the different types of operations occur is necessary.
Band plans are based on the FCC regulations, but go beyond them to recognize
popular calling frequencies and the segments where you can usually find cer­
tain operating styles or modes. A complete list of all band plans is beyond the
scope of this book, but a good source of up-to-date U.S. band plans is on the
ARRL Web site at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/regulations/bandplan.
html#17m. Be aware that different band plans are outside the United States.
Europe and Japan, for example, both have substantial differences on certain
bands.

Tuning In a Signal
Tuning in a signal consists of using the main tuning knob on the radio to change
the radio’s operating frequency. The knob changes the frequency of a Variable
Frequency Oscillator, or VFO, that controls the radio’s frequency. The radio’s
operating frequency is displayed on a dial or display. A received signal’s fre­
quency is the radio’s displayed frequency when the signal is tuned in properly.

93

94

Part III: Hamming It Up
The correct method of tuning in a signal depends on the type of signal it is.
On signals that you receive or copy manually — such as Morse code, SSB, or
FM — you use your ears. For signals sent using special equipment — such as
RTTY, packet, or PSK31 — you have to use the displays from the equipment
to get your receiver set just right. Whether you tune in a signal from above or
below its frequency doesn’t matter, although you may develop a preference
for one or the other.
To start, set your radio to the type of signal you want to receive — CW, USB,
LSB, or FM, for example. If your radio has a squelch control that mutes the
audio unless a signal is present, you should set it to its off position to let all
signals pass. That allows you to hear even a very weak signal as you tune by.
For help with the technical aspects of your equipment, try the Ham Radio For
Dummies Web site (as described in the Introduction to this book). The next few
sections outline a quick guide to tuning in the most common types of signals.

Morse code (CW)
Morse code signals are often referred to as CW, which stands for Continuous
Wave. Early radio signals would die out quickly because they were generated
by sparks. Soon hams discovered how to make steady signals, or continuous
waves, that they can turn on and off with a telegraph key. Morse code and
Continuous Wave (or CW) thus became synonymous.
To tune in to a Morse code signal, follow these steps:
1. Set the rig to receive Morse code by selecting the CW mode.
2. Set the rig to use a wide filter if your rig has more than one filter
available.
A wide filter allows you to find and tune in stations, while the narrower
ones block out nearby signals. Selecting filters is done with a Wide/
Narrow control or with switches labeled with the filter’s width. (Check the
operating manual for precise instructions.)
3. Adjust the main tuning dial until you hear a Morse code signal.
The pitch changes as you change the receiver’s frequency. Tune until the
pitch is comfortable to your ear. A low tone (300–600 Hz) is most restful to
the ear, but a higher tone (500–1200 Hz) often sounds crisper. Most radios
are designed so that when you tune in a signal with a tone or pitch around
500 Hz, the transmitted signal is heard by the other station at a similar

Chapter 8: Making Contact
pitch. If you prefer to listen to a note more than 100 Hz higher or lower,
check your rig’s operating manual to find out how you can adjust the
radio to accommodate your preferred pitch.
4. When you tune in the signal at your preferred pitch, select the nar­
rower filter (if available) to reduce noise and interference.
If the frequency is not crowded or noisy, you can stay with the wider filter.

Single-sideband (SSB)
Single-sideband (SSB) is the most popular mode of voice transmission on the
HF bands. (FM is mainly used above 50 MHz.) The mode got its name because
of a key difference from the older mode, AM, which is used by AM broadcast
stations and was the original voice mode hams used. Whereas an AM transmit­
ter outputs two identical copies of the voice information, called sidebands,
a SSB signal only outputs one. This signal is much more efficient and saves
precious radio spectrum space.
Most voice signals on HF are SSB, so you have to choose between USB (Upper
Sideband) and LSB (Lower Sideband). The actual SSB signals extend in a narrow
band above (USB) or below (LSB) the carrier frequency displayed on the radio
(see Figure 8-2). How do you choose? By long tradition stemming from the
design of the early sideband rigs, on the HF bands above 9 MHz, voice opera­
tion is always on USB. Below 9 MHz, you find everyone on LSB.

USB
SSB signals occupy about
3 kHz of radio spectrum

Voice signal extends
ABOVE the
displayed frequency
14203.0

Figure 8-2:
The Upper
Sideband
and Lower
Sideband
frequencies.

14200.0
Displayed
Frequency

7200.0
Displayed
Frequency
LSB

7197.0
Voice signal extends
BELOW the
displayed frequency

95

96

Part III: Hamming It Up
Because hams must keep all signals within the allocated bands, you need
to remember where your signal is actually transmitted. Most voice signals
occupy about 3 kHz of bandwidth. If the radio is set to USB, that means your
signal appears on the air from the displayed frequency up to 3 kHz higher.
Similarly on LSB, the signal appears up to 3 kHz below the displayed frequency.
When operating close to the band edges, make sure your signal stays in the
allocated band. For example, on 20-meters, the highest frequency allowed for
hams is 14.350 MHz. You can tune a radio operating on USB no higher than
14.350 MHz -3 kHz = 14.347 MHz to stay legal.
If you tune across an old-style AM signal that has both upper and lower side­
bands, you can tune in the signal using either USB or LSB. The whistling noise
that gets lower and lower in frequency as you tune in the voice is the AM car­
rier frequency, centered precisely between the two voice sidebands. When
the carrier tone goes so low that you can’t hear it any more, you can listen to
either sideband.
To tune into an SSB signal, follow these steps:
1. Set your rig to receive SSB signals.
You may also have to choose Lower Sideband (LSB) or Upper Sideband
(USB).
2. Select the widest SSB filter.
3. Adjust the tuning dial until you hear the SSB frequency.
As you approach an SSB signal’s frequency, you hear either high-pitched
crackling (like duck quacking) or low-pitched rumbling. You can tell it’s a
voice from the rhythm, but it’s unintelligible. These are the high or low
frequency parts of the operator’s voice.
4. Continue to tune until the voice sounds natural.
If it sounds bass-y, your transmitted signal sounds too treble-y to the
receiving operator and vice versa.

FM
Frequency modulation (FM) is the most popular mode of transmission on the
VHF and UHF bands. FM signals encode the voice signal as frequency varia­
tions. Because hams adapted surplus FM radios used by businesses and public
safety agencies to the ham bands, operation was organized as channels on spe­
cific frequencies. This convention is also used today, so tuning on most FM rigs
consists of selecting different channels or moving between specific frequen­
cies, instead of a continuous frequency adjustment.

Chapter 8: Making Contact
To tune into an FM signal, follow these steps:
1. Set your rig to operate on FM.
Most VHF/UHF radios only use FM, so your radio may have a control for
selecting the mode.
2. Set the squelch control so that noise is heard.
This process is called opening the squelch.
3. Reset the squelch to stop the noise.
This process is to allow you to hear weak signals without having to listen
to continuous noise. For very weak signals, you may have to re-open the
squelch to receive it.
4. Using a band plan or repeater directory as a guide, select a frequency.
If you are using an FM-only rig such as a hand-held or mobile unit, you
can enter the frequency via a keypad, rotate a tuning dial that changes
frequency as on HF, or select between different memory channels. If hams
are active on that channel, you hear the operator’s voice. Depending on
the change in frequency with each step, you may have to tune back and
forth to find the frequency where the voices sound best. If you are mistuned or off frequency, the voices are muffled or distorted.
If you are using a multi-band radio that uses a main tuning dial, you can
tune in the signal either by using your ear (tuning for the most naturalsounding voice with the least distortion) or, if available, by watching a
tuning indicator called a discriminator, sometimes labeled DISC. The dis­
criminator shows whether you are above or below the FM signal’s center
frequency. When the signal is centered, you’re tuned just right.

Radioteletype (RTTY) and data signals
RTTY signals (sometimes pronounced ritty) consist of characters transmitted
as a sequence of two different tones, called mark and space. Each character
consists of a specific pattern of tones, alternating several times per second.
RTTY signals sound like a warbling bird that only knows two notes. You cannot
decode or generate RTTY signals manually, but you can with special equip­
ment external to the radio that has a serial data connection to a computer, or
by a computer sound card with special software. The radio treats the tones
of a RTTY signal as a voice signal, either receiving or transmitting.
You can tune in data signals, such as PSK or MFSK, using very similar tech­
niques and equipment. They are also constructed from audio tones and may
sound like warbling or bursts of tones. In the following tuning steps, treat DATA
as the equivalent to RTTY.

97

98

Part III: Hamming It Up
To tune into a RTTY signal, follow these steps:
1. Set your radio to receive data signals, usually by a RTTY or DATA mode
control.
If your radio doesn’t have a DATA mode, use USB or LSB, following the
USB/LSB convention for the band you’re using. (The tones used for RTTY
are near 2 kHz; selecting RTTY sometimes makes the audio noise from
the receiver sound tinny as the receiver adjusts itself for higher-pitched
tones.)
2. Configure the external data encoder/decoder to provide a tuning indi­
cator; if you have a sound card, open a tuning window.
You need to consult the operating manuals to determine how to do that.
Tuning indicator styles vary, but most display a representation of the
received tones with overlaid guide lines or figures that allow you to align
the signal with the guide lines by tuning the receiver and adjusting the
volume or AF Gain control.
3. Tune in the data signal as you tune an SSB signal, but instead of listen­
ing for natural speech, watch the tuning indicator or window until the
signal’s tones properly align.
The received data window of the terminal or sound card software begins
to show characters coming in. If the characters are garbled, be sure you
are on the correct sideband (USB or LSB) or adjust the tuning slightly.
Your software or decoder probably has a troubleshooting section to
help you tune in the signal.

Listening on HF
Most of the traditional shortwave bands between 1.8 and 30 MHz are broadly
organized into two segments. Digital transmissions such as CW (Continuous
Wave, meaning, Morse code), radioteletype (or RTTY), and data occupy the
lower segment. Voice signals occupy the higher segment. Within each of these
segments, the lower frequencies are where you tend to find the long-distance
(or DX) contacts, special-event stations, and contest operating. Casual conver­
sations, known as ragchews, and scheduled on-the-air meetings (nets) gener­
ally take place on the higher frequencies within each band.
Table 8-1 provides some general guidelines where you can find the different
types of activity. Depending on which activity holds your interest, start at one
edge of the listed frequency ranges and start tuning. While tuning, use the
widest filters your radio has for the mode (CW, SSB, or FM) that you select.
You won’t miss a station if you tune quickly, and finding the right frequency

Chapter 8: Making Contact
when you discover a contact is easier. After you tune in a contact, then you
can tighten up your filters to narrower bandwidths, limiting what you hear to
just the one contact.

Table 8-1

Activity Map for the HF Bands

Band

CW, RTTY, and Data Modes

Voice Modes

160 Meters (1.8–
2.0 MHz)

1.800–1.860 MHz
(no fixed upper limit)

1.843–2.000 MHz

80 Meters (3.5–
4.0 MHz)

3.500–3.750 MHz

3.750–4.000 MHz

60 Meters (5.5 MHz)

Not permitted

5.3305, 5.3465, 5.3665,
5.3715, and 5.4035 MHz

40 Meters (7.0–
7.3 MHz)

7.000–7.150 MHz

7.150–7.300 MHz

30 Meters (10.1–
10.15 MHz)

10.100–10.125 MHz CW 10.125–
10.150 MHz RTTY and data

Not permitted

20 Meters (14.0–
14.35 MHz)

14.000–14.150 MHz

14.150–14.350 MHz

17 Meters (18.068–
18.168 MHz)

18.068–18.100 MHz
(no fixed upper limit)

18.110–18.168 MHz

15 Meters (21.0–
21.45 MHz)

21.000–21.200 MHz

21.200–21.450 MHz

12 Meters (24.89–
24.99 MHz)

24.890–24.930 MHz (no fixed
upper limit)

24.930–24.990 MHz

10 Meters (28.0–
29.7 MHz)

28.000–28.300 MHz

28.300–29.7 MHz (most
activity below 28.600 MHz)

If every voice you hear seems scrambled, your rig is probably set to receive
the wrong sideband. Change sidebands and try tuning again.
Because the ionosphere strongly affects the signals on the HF bands as they
go from point A to point B, the time of day makes a big difference. On the lower
bands, the lower layers of the ionosphere absorb signals through the day, but
disappear at night, allowing signals to reflect off the higher layers and reflect
over long distances. Conversely, the higher bands require the sun’s illumina­
tion for the layers to reflect HF signals back to Earth, supporting long-distance
hops or skips. Table 8-2 shows the general guidelines for what you hear on the

99

100 Part III: Hamming It Up
different HF bands at different times of day. With the exception of sporadic
effects, the ionosphere is much less a factor on the VHF and UHF bands at 50
MHz and above.

Table 8-2

Day/Night HF Band Usage

HF Band

Day

Night

160-, 80-, and
60-meters (1.8, 3.5,
and 5 MHz)

Local and regional out to
100–200 miles.

Local to long distance with DX
best near sunset or sunrise at
one or both ends of the contact.

40- and 30-meters
(7 and 10 MHz)

Local and regional out to
300–400 miles.

Short-range (20 or 30 miles) and
medium distances (150 miles) to
worldwide.

20- and 17-meters
(14 and 18 MHz)

Regional to long distance.
Bands open at or near
sunrise and close at night.

20-meters is often open to the
west at night and may be open
24 hours a day.

15-, 12-, and
10-meters (21, 24,
and 28 MHz)

Primarily long distance
(1,000 miles and more).
Bands open to the east
after sunrise and to the
west in the afternoon.

10-meters is often used for
local communications 24 hours
a day.

Listening on VHF and UHF
Most contacts on the VHF and UHF bands are made using repeaters. Repeaters
are most useful for local and regional communication, allowing individual hams
to use low-power hand-held or mobile radios to make contacts over that same
wide area. For this scheme to work, the repeater input and output frequencies
are fixed and well-known, so the bands are organized into sets of channels.
(Repeaters are not used on the HF bands because of the need to both receive
and transmit simultaneously — difficult within single HF bands.)
Most VHF and UHF voice contacts use the FM or frequency modulation mode
of voice transmission because of its excellent noise suppression, making for
easy listening. The drawback is that FM doesn’t have the range of CW or SSB
transmissions. Contacts made directly between hams using FM are referred
to as simplex, and using a repeater, as duplex.
Repeater and simplex FM channels are generally separated by 20 kHz. You can
view a complete band plan for the 2-meter and 70-cm bands at www.arrl.org/
FandES/field/regulations/bands.html. I cover repeater operation in more
detail in Chapter 9.

Chapter 8: Making Contact

Dealing with beacons
After you tune the bands, you may still not know
for sure whether the band is open (meaning that
signals can travel beyond line-of-sight), and in
what direction. Propagation software is avail­
able to offer predictions to help make those
decisions, but those predictions are, well, only
predictions. To help determine whether a band
is open, beacon transmitters are set up around
the world. A beacon is a transmitter that sends
a message continuously on a known frequency.
Amateurs receiving that beacon’s signal know
that the band is open to the beacon’s location.

network is available at www.ncdxf.org/
beacons.

Other amateurs have set up their own beacons,
too. You can find listings of frequencies for these
amateur beacons on various Web sites. A good
reference for all beacons on HF and 6-meters is
the excellent list at www.keele.ac.uk/
depts/por/28.htm. Amateur VHF beacons
are listed on several Web sites; just enter ama­
teur VHF beacon into a Web search engine to
locate several beacon listings.

The biggest network of beacons in the world is
run by the Northern California DX Foundation
(NCDXF). The network consists of 18 beacons
around the world, as shown in the following
figure. These beacons transmit on the 20­
through 10-meter bands in a round-robin
sequence. They also vary their transmitting
power from 100 to 1 watt so that hams receiving
the beacon signal can judge the quality of prop­
agation. A complete description of this useful

Repeaters enable you to use low-power and mobile radios to communicate
over a large distance. Many hams use repeaters as a kind of intercom to keep in
touch with friends and family members as they go about their daily business.
These contacts are generally much less formal than on HF and you likely hear
contacts between the same groups of hams every day. Repeaters are where
you find local hams and find out about local events.
To make contact via a repeater, you may have to enable tone-access on your
radio. Tone access adds one of several standard low-frequency tones to your
speech audio to let the repeater know that your signal is intended for it and is
not interference. If you do not transmit the required tone, the repeater does
not re-transmit your signal and you can not be heard. (The radio’s operating
manual can tell you how to select and activate the tones.)
Not all repeater channels have an active repeater. In order to find repeaters in
your area or while traveling, repeater directories are available from several
sources. Some of these directories are nationwide; local clubs or repeater
organizations publish others and focus on a specific region (see Figure 8-3).

101

102 Part III: Hamming It Up
The directories and Web sites list frequencies and locations of repeaters so
you can tell which may be available in your area. Repeater directories also
list the required access tones and other operating information and features
for individual repeaters.
To listen to repeater contacts, follow these steps:
1. Use a repeater directory or Web search to find a repeater in your area.
2. Determine the repeater’s input and output frequencies.
3. Set up your radio to listen on the repeater’s output frequency.
You can also listen to stations transmitting to the repeater, called listen­
ing on the input.
4. Tune your radio as you do for FM signals.
If you need help tuning your radio, turn to the section “Tuning In a
Signal,” earlier in this chapter.

Figure 8-3:
Repeater
directories.

For direct ham-to-ham contacts on VHF and UHF over distances where FM
results in noisy, unpleasant contacts, use the more efficient CW and SSB modes,
which are called weak signal communication on VHF and UHF because you can
make contacts with much lower signal levels than by using FM. The very lowest
segments of the VHF and UHF bands are set aside for weak-signal operation.
Weak-signal operations are conducted in much the same way as SSB and CW
on HF with contacts taking place on semi-random frequencies centered around
calling frequencies. To tune in contacts on the weak-signal segments of VHF and
UHF bands, see the section “Tuning In a Signal,” earlier in this chapter.

Chapter 8: Making Contact

Deciphering a QSO
As you tune across the bands, dozens of contacts may be going on. That sounds
like a bewildering variety, but you’ll find that most contacts (or QSOs) are
one of three types:
 Casual conversation (ragchews)
 Nets
 Contesting (DX-ing)

Chewing the rag
Chewing the rag is probably the oldest type of activity in ham radio. I have no
idea where the expression came from, except possibly from “chewing the fat,”
but if you like to chat, you’re a ragchewer and are following in the footsteps of
the mythical master ragchewer The Old Sock, himself! Ragchewing is an excel­
lent way to build your operating skills, perhaps leading to an award such as the
A-1 Operator Club Award shown in Figure 8-4.

Figure 8-4:
The ARRL
offers
several
operating
awards,
including
the A-1
Operator
Club shown
here and
the Code
Proficiency
Certificate.

103

104 Part III: Hamming It Up
Keep these things in mind while you’re chewing the rag:
 Start with your basic information: your call sign, signal report, operator
name, and the location of your station. Ragchews may be conducted
between hams in the same town or across the world from each other.
 After you exchange basic information, you may wander off in any direc­
tion. Hams talk about family, other hobbies, work, propagation, techni­
cal topics, operating, you name it, just about anything is discussed.
In general, hams avoid talking about politics or religious topics and
don’t use profanity. That leaves a lot to talk about, and hams seem to
cover most of it.
 Wrap up the contact when you run out of things to talk about, condi­
tions change, or maintaining contact is difficult. Exchange call signs
once more, and tune away.
Round tables are where a group of hams on one frequency share a contact
informally. Each ham talks in turn and all get a chance in sequence. A moder­
ator may also regulate round tables.

Meeting on nets
Nets, an abbreviation of networks, meet at a regular time and on a consistent
frequency. They have a theme — message handling (or traffic), emergency
communication training, nets for mariners or mobile stations, or topics such
as antique radios or technical Q&A.
Follow these tips when accessing a net:
 Check in with the net control station, or NCS, and list your business.
The NCS orchestrates all exchanges of information and formally termi­
nates the net when business is concluded.
The net may meet until all business is taken care of or just for a fixed
amount of time.
 If you’re a visitor, find out the specific time you can check in. Nets
often have a specific time when visitor stations can check in.
You can find nets on a specific topic or frequency online. For example, the
ARRL Net Directory is at www.remote.arrl.org/FandES/field/nets.
I discuss nets and net operation in more detail in Chapter 10.

Chapter 8: Making Contact

Contesting and chasing DX
Radio contests are competitions in which you exchange call signs and a short
message as quickly as possible. Chasing DX, or DX-ing, is the pursuit of con­
tacts with distant (for which DX stands) stations.
While contesting or DX-ing, follow these rules:
 Keep contest contacts short. In a contest, the object is generally to
make the largest number of contacts, so dilly-dallying around is not
desirable.
 Pass along just the minimum amount of information, called the
exchange. Then sign off in search of more contacts.
While DX-ing, keep contacts with rare stations short — just your call sign
and a signal report — if many are calling. Keeping contacts short allows
other hams to make a desirable contact, too. Ragchews with DX stations
are encouraged, if conditions support good signals in both directions. Try
to judge conditions and tailor your contact appropriately.
DX contacts are short because the distances are great and maintaining
contact is difficult.
 If you encounter stations making contest QSOs, listen until you figure
out what information is being exchanged before participating. By far,
the most common information is a signal report and your location (often
expressed as a numbered zone or section defined by the contest spon­
sor) or serial number (assign a serial number for each contact you make
in the contest). If it’s your fifth QSO in that contest, your serial number
is 5, for example. The contesters are happy to explain what information
they need. You can usually find the complete rules for contests in maga­
zines or on the sponsor’s Web site.
 Remember that not everyone speaks English. Most hams often know
enough words in English to communicate a name, location, and signal
report. Otherwise, an international set of Q-signals allows you to exchange
a lot of useful information with someone with whom you don’t share a
common language.
See the next section, “Q-Signals,” for more on Q-signals. DX-ing is a great
way to exercise that rusty high-school Spanish or German, too!
I cover contests and DX-ing in more detail in Chapter 12.

105

106 Part III: Hamming It Up
Q-Signals
Q-signals began in the early days of radio as a set of standard abbreviations to
save time and allow radio operators who did not share a common language
to communicate effectively. Today, amateurs use Q-signals as shorthand to
speed up communication. The definitions have drifted a little over the nearcentury of radio, but you find their use ubiquitous. (Table 8-3 lists many
common Q-signals.)
During contacts, Q-signals often take the form of a question. For example,
QTH? means “What is your location?” The reply, QTH New York, means “My
location is New York.”

Table 8-3

Common Q-Signals

Q-Signal

Meaning As a Query

Meaning As a Response

QRG

What is my exact frequency?

Your exact frequency is
_______ kHz.

QRL

Is the frequency busy?

The frequency is busy.
Please do not interfere.

QRM

Are you being interfered with?

I am being interfered with.
(As a noun: interference)

QRN

Are you receiving static?

I am receiving static. (As a
noun: static)

QRO

Shall I increase power?

Increase power.

QRP

Shall I decrease power?

Decrease power.

QRQ

Shall I send faster?

Send faster (__WPM).

QRS

Shall I send more slowly?

Send more slowly (__WPM).

QRT

Shall I stop sending?

Stop sending.

QRU

Have you anything more for me?

I have nothing more for you.

QRV

Are you ready?

I am ready.

QRX

Do you want me to standby?

Standby.

QRZ

Who is calling me?

Not used as a response.

QSB

Is my signal fading?

Your signal is fading.

Chapter 8: Making Contact

Q-Signal

Meaning As a Query

Meaning As a Response

QSK

Refers to “break in operation”
where the sending station can
receive between Morse code
characters or individual dits
and dahs.

QSL

Did you receive and understand
my transmission?

QSO

Abbreviation for a contact.

QSP

Can you relay to___?

QST

General call preceding a message
addressed to all amateurs.

QSX

Can you receive on ___ kHz?

I am listening on ___ kHz.

QSY

Can you change to transmit on
another frequency (or to ___ kHz).

I can change to transmit
on another frequency (or to
___ kHz).

QTC

Do you have messages for me?

I have messages for you.

QTH

What is your location?

My location is ____.

Your transmission was
received and understood.

I can relay to____.

Making a Call
Your big moment approaches! In this example, I use the dummy call sign of
KD7FYX. Replace this call sign with your own. Follow these steps when tuning
one of the HF bands:
1. Find someone to talk to.
When you come across a fellow ham making a general “come in, anybody”
call, you have found someone calling CQ. This situation is the easiest way
for you to make a contact. You hear something like this: “CQ CQ CQ this is
November Zero Alpha X-ray standing by. . . .”
November, Alpha, and X-ray are phonetics that represent the letters of my
call sign, NØAX. Phonetics are used because many letters sound the same
(think B, E, T, P) and the words help get the exact call sign across. Table
8-4 lists the standard phonetics hams use. You may encounter alterna­
tives, such as Germany instead of Golf, for instance. When in doubt, I
respond or call with the phonetics used by the station I want to contact.

107

108 Part III: Hamming It Up
2. Carefully note their call sign and respond.
Press the microphone button, and say: “November Zero Alpha X-ray this
is Kilo Delta Seven Foxtrot Yankee X-ray (repeat twice more), over.”
Give the calling station’s call sign once (you don’t have to repeat this —
they already know it!) and then give yours three times (a 1-by-3 call). If the
calling station is very strong, you may just give your call twice. You don’t
need to repeat their call sign or shout, just speak in a normal, clear voice.
3. Listen for the response if the station hears you.
You may hear something like: “KD7FYX (possibly in phonetics) from
NØAX, thanks for the call. Your signal report is. . . .”
And you have a QSO in your logbook!
Making this kind of contact works a little differently on a repeater. Hams mostly
use repeaters as a kind of regional intercom, so they are less likely to make a
general call for a random QSO. For example, you never hear CQ CQ CQ . . . on a
repeater. Hams turn the radio on in the car or in the shack to listen for friends
or just monitor the frequencies. Your cue that someone is available for a con­
tact is that they announce their presence by saying, “This is NØAX, monitoring,”
or some other kind of general “I’m here” announcement. Just give them a 1-by-1
call, “NØAX this is KD7FYX,” and see if they come back to you. You also get
good results by calling a station immediately after they complete a contact.
Repeater usage tends to be more utility-oriented than on HF and you may find
the contacts a little briefer. To respond on a repeater where signals are proba­
bly quite clear, just give a 1-by-1 call: “NØAX this is KD7FYX.”
On CW or the digital modes, the process is much the same and looks like this:
1. Copy the calling station’s call sign.
You hear something like: “CQ CQ CQ DE NØAX NØAX NØAX K.”
DE is the telegrapher’s shorthand for “From.” K means “End of Trans­
mission, Go Ahead.” (Note: No upper- or lowercase characters are in
Morse code — “de” is equivalent to “DE.”)
2. Respond with a 1-by-2 or 1-by-3 call.
Say something like: “NØAX DE KD7FYX KD7FYX KD7FYX K.”
3. Listen for a response.
You probably hear something like: “KD7FYX DE NØAX TKS FOR THE
CALL—UR RST. . . .”
TKS is shorthand for “Thanks,” and UR is shorthand for “Your.”

Chapter 8: Making Contact
Telegraphers and typists are a lazy lot and tend to use all sorts of abbrevia­
tions to shorten the text. A table of abbreviations is available at ac6v.com/
morseaids.htm#CW.

Table 8-4

International Telecommunications Union Standard

Letter

Phonetic

Letter

Phonetic

A

Alfa

N

November

B

Bravo

O

Oscar

C

Charlie

P

Papa

D

Delta

Q

Quebec

E

Echo

R

Romeo

F

Foxtrot

S

Sierra

G

Golf

T

Tango

H

Hotel

U

Uniform

I

India

V

Victor

J

Juliet

W

Whiskey

K

Kilo

X

X-ray

L

Lima

Y

Yankee

M

Mike

Z

Zulu

Failing to make contact
But what if you try to make a contact and your call doesn’t get answered with
a response? Your signal may be too weak to hear or the station may have
strong noise or interference that you can’t hear. In this case, you find another
station to call. Assuming that your signal is strong enough for other stations
to hear it however, several other things may have happened:
 Other hams are calling at the same time. You can either wait around
until the station you intended to contact is free and try again, or you can
tune around for another contact opportunity. The most important thing
is not to get discouraged!

109

110 Part III: Hamming It Up
 The calling station can hear you, but can’t make out your call. The
ham may either ask you to call again or respond to you, but won’t have
your call sign correct. The station may say: “station calling, please come
again.” Or “QRZed?” or “Who is the station calling?”
QRZed? is the international Q-signal for “Who is calling me?” Hams often
use the British pronunciation, Zed, for the letter Z. At this point, just
repeat your call two or three times, using standard phonetics and say,
Over when you finish.
The station gets your call wrong by a letter or two. First stand by a
few seconds to be sure another station with that call sign isn’t on the
same frequency. For example, I’m often on the air at the same time as
NØAXL and NØXA and we are always getting confused. If a couple sec­
onds go by and you don’t hear another station responding, then
respond with: “NØAX this is KD7FYX (repeat twice more), do you have
my call correct? Over.”
If repeated attempts at making contacts aren’t producing results, check out
your equipment. The easiest way is to locate a licensed friend and have him
or her make a contact with you. That way, you know your transmitter is (or
isn’t) working and your signal is understandable. If you don’t have a licensed
friend, run through the following checklist to be sure you’re transmitting
what, when, and where you think you should be:
 Are you sure you’re transmitting on the right frequency? Press the
microphone switch or press the Morse key, and watch the radio’s dis­
play very carefully. The indicators for frequency and sideband should
stay exactly the same. You may be transmitting on a different sideband
or frequency than you think you are!
 Are you sure that your transmitter is producing power? Watch the rig’s
power output meter to be sure the output power varies along with your
voice or keying.
 Is the antenna connected properly? You should be receiving signals that
are moderate to strong, indicating 4 to 9 S-units on the radio’s meter. If
the signals are very weak, you may have an antenna or cable problem.
This problem also shows up as an SWR reading of more than 5:1 on your
rig’s SWR meter.
After your call is received correctly by the other station, proceed with the
rest of the contact. Failed contacts and errors are handled very similarly on
CW and the digital modes. Don’t be bashful about correcting your call sign.
After all, it’s your radio name.

Chapter 8: Making Contact

Breaking in is not hard to do
Sometimes you can’t wait for the end of a contact to call a station. Interrupting
another contact is called breaking in, or breaking, because the proper proce­
dure is to wait for a pause in the contact and quickly say, “Break” (or send BK
with Morse code).
Why do you want to do this? Perhaps you have an emergency and need to
make contact right away. More frequently, you tune into a contact and the
participants are talking about a topic or person that you know about. If you
wait for the contact to end, you may not be able to contribute or help.
To break in a contact, follow these steps:
1. Listen for a good opportunity to make your presence known.
When the stations switch transmitting and receiving roles is usually a
good time to break in. You hear something like: “So Lowell, back to you.
KD7DQO from NØAX.”
2. Quickly make a short transmission.
Don’t be shy and wait or the other station begins transmitting. Say:
“Break.”
3. Wait to see if either station heard your transmission.
One station hears you and says: “This is KD7DQO, who’s the breaker?”
If no one hears your transmission, start over with Step 1.
4. Respond as if you’re answering a CQ.
Say: “KD7DQO this is KD7FYX (repeated), over.” Depending on the circum­
stances, you can then tell them your name and location before proceeding
to explain why you broke in. At that point, the stations probably engage
you in further conversation and you’re in a three-way QSO! Sometimes,
they won’t want to have a third party in the contact, in which case you
just courteously sign off and go on to the next contact.

Having a QSO
Because you listen to contacts (QSOs) on the air, you understand the gen­
eral flow of the contacts. What do hams talk about, anyway? Like most
casual contacts with a person you don’t know, warming up to a contact
takes a little time.

111

112 Part III: Hamming It Up
During the initial phase of the contact, you exchange information about the
quality of the signals, your name, and your location. This phase is a friendly
way of judging whether conditions permit you to have an extended contact.
Then follow with information about your station and probably the local
weather conditions. This information gives the other station an idea of your
capabilities and whether static or noise is likely to be a problem.
Here are the common items you exchange when making a contact:
 Signal Report: This report is an indication of your signal’s strength and
clarity at the receiving station.
• SSB: A two-digit system communicates readability and strength,
although sometimes you can just use a single Q-number as a qual­
ity indicator.
• CW and RTTY: The same two-digit system is used for readability
and strength, but a third digit is added to indicate purity of the
transmitter’s note — rarely anything but 9 nowadays because
transmitting equipment is quite good. If a poor signal is encoun­
tered, don’t hesitate to give an appropriate report.
• FM: The signal report is the degree to which the noise is covered
up or quieting.
• Digital modes: Use the same method as CW or RTTY, or don’t
bother with a signal report at all.
See Table 8-5 for how to report your signal quality.
 QTH (Location): On HF, where signals take place over long distances, you
generally give your town and state or province. You can give an actual
address if requested, but it is usually not needed (if you aren’t comfort­
able doing so). On VHF/UHF, you report the actual physical location, par­
ticularly if you’re using a mobile radio.
 Rig: You can just report the power output shown on your transmitter’s
power meter (25 watts) or give the full model number and let your con­
tact assume the transmitter is running at full output power.
 Antenna: Typically, you just report the style and number of elements,
such as a two-element quad or 5⁄ 8-wave whip. Sometimes you can report
a specific model number.
 Weather: Remember that stations outside the United States report the
temperature in degrees Celsius! Standard weather abbreviations you can
use on CW and digital modes include SNY, CLDY, OVRCST, RNY, and SNW.
A Russian ham in Siberia once gave me a weather report of “VY SNW”
(very snow).

Chapter 8: Making Contact
Table 8-5

Reporting Signal Quality

Mode

System

Report Definitions

SSB

RS: Readability & Strength

R is a value from 1 to 5; 5 means easy
to understand, 3 is very difficult, 1 and
2 are rarely used.
S is a value from 1 to 9. This number
generally corresponds to the rig’s
signal strength meter reading on
voice peaks.

CW

Q-(number): Indicates
overall quality

Q1 to Q5; Q5 indicates excellent
readability; reports below Q3 are rare.

RST: Readability, Strength,
and Tone

R is a value from 1 to 5, same
as SSB.
S is a value from 1 to 9, same as SSB.
T is a value from 1 to 9; 9 being a pure
tone and 1 being raspy noise. The
letter C is sometimes added to indi­
cate a chirpy signal.

FM

Level of Quieting (Signal
report is for the station
calling, not the repeater’s
output signal strength)

Full Quieting means almost all noise is
suppressed. Scratchy means noise is
present enough to partially disrupt
understanding. Flutter means rapid
variations in strength as a vehicle is
moving. Just Making It means only
strong enough to actuate the repeater,
but not good enough for a contact.

After you go through the first stages of the QSO and the other station sounds
like the ham wants to continue, you can try discussing some other personal
information — your age, other hobbies, what you do for a living, your family
members, and of course ham radio topics such as propagation conditions,
any special interests, or particularly good contacts you made recently.
The FCC forbids obscene speech (which is pretty rare on the air). The three
topics that seem to lead to elevated blood pressures are politics, religion,
and sex — hardly surprising. So hams tend to find other things to talk about.
Oh sure, you find some arguments on the air from time to time, just like in
any group of people. Don’t be drawn in to doing it yourself — no one benefits.
Just spin the big knob and tune on by.

113

114 Part III: Hamming It Up
The trick is to keep your transmissions short enough so that the other station
has a chance to respond or so that someone else can break in. That way, you
both can have a QSO just as long and detailed as you want. If propagation is
changing or the band is crowded or noisy, short transmissions allow you to ask
for missed information. At the conclusion of the contact, you may also encour­
age the other station to call in again. Lifelong friendships are sometimes forged!

Calling CQ
After you make a few contacts, the lure of fame and fortune becomes too
strong to resist — it’s time to call CQ yourself! How do you go about it so that
you sound right? If by now you have listened to dozens of CQs, which of them
sounded the best to you? What makes them sound good?
A CQ consists of two basic parts repeated in a cycle. The first part is the CQ
itself. For a general-purpose, “Hello, World!” just say “CQ”. If you’re looking
for a specific area or type of caller, you must add that information as in, “CQ
DX” or “CQ New England.”
The second part of the CQ is your call sign. You must speak or send clearly
and correctly. Many stations mumble or rush through their call signs or send
it differently each time, running the letters together. You probably tuned past
CQs like that.
A few CQs followed by “from,” or “DE,” and a couple of call signs makes up
the CQ cycle. If you say “CQ” three times followed by your call sign twice,
that’s a 3-by-2 call. If you repeat that pattern four times, it’s a 3-by-2-by-4. At
the end of the cycle, you add “Standing by for a call,” or “K,” to let everybody
listening know that it’s time to call.
An example of a 3-by-3-by-3 on CW is “CQ CQ CQ DE NØAX NØAX NØAX CQ
CQ CQ DE NØAX NØAX NØAX CQ CQ CQ DE NØAX NØAX NØAX K.”
Depending on conditions, repeat the cycle (CQ and your call sign) two to five
times, keeping it consistent throughout. If the band is busy, keep it short. If
you’re calling on a quiet band or for a specific target area, four or five cycles
may be required. When you’re done, listen for at least a few seconds before
starting a new cycle again to give anyone time to start transmitting.
Here’s a short list of CQ Do’s and Don’ts:
 Do: Keep your two-part cycle short to keep the caller’s interest.
 Do: Use standard phonetics for your call sign on voice modes at least
once per cycle.

Chapter 8: Making Contact
 Do: Send CW at a speed you feel comfortable receiving.
 Do: Strive to sound friendly and enthusiastic.
 Do: Wait long enough between CQs for callers to answer.
 Don’t: Mumble, rush, or slur your words.
 Don’t: Send erratically or run letters together.
 Don’t: Drag the CQ out. A 3-by-3-by-3 call is good for most conditions.
 Don’t: Shout or turn up the microphone audio level too far. Clean audio
sounds best.
Treat each CQ like a short advertisement for you and your station. It should
make the listener think, “Yeah, I’d like to give this station a call!”

The long goodbye
If hams do one thing well, it’s saying goodbye. Hams use abbreviations, friendly
names and phrases, and colloquialisms that pad the contact before actually
signing off. Hearing anyone say, “Well, I don’t have anything more to say, W1XYZ
signing off,” is rare.
Towards the end of the contact, let the other station know that you’re out of
gas. Some good endings are the following:
 I AM QRU: In Morse code speak, QRO means “out of things to talk about.”
 See you down the log: Encourage another contact at a later time.
 BCNU: Morse code for “be seein’ you.”
 CUL: Morse code for “see you later.”
 88 or Old Man: Throw love and kisses to any female operator, regardless
of whether you know her well or not. Or tack on an affectionate “Old
Man” (if appropriate).
 73: Don’t forget your best regards! That’s required!
 Pulling the big switch or GOING QRT: If you’re leaving the airwaves,
then be sure to say so after your call sign on the last transmission. On
voice, say “NØAX closing down” or on a Morse code contact, “NØAX SK
CL.” Anyone listening knows you’re vacating the frequency.
Sometimes, the signing off takes as long as the signing on.

115

116 Part III: Hamming It Up

Chapter 9

Casual Operating
In This Chapter
 Transmitting on repeaters
 Maintaining a casual contact
 Copying Morse code
 Picking up remote messages

A

fter you tune around the amateur bands for a while, you’ll agree that the
lion’s share of the ham’s life is making relaxed, casual contacts. Some
contacts are just random “Hello, anybody out there?” calls. You’ll also hear
contacts between hams that are obviously old friends or family members that
meet on the air on a regular basis.

Lots of people also use ham radio to maintain contact, so to speak, while
they’re traveling. (I realize that this may be a shock, but in some places on
Earth, a mobile phone’s service indicator won’t light up!) In remote places,
ham radio is available to fill the breach. It’s fun and people enjoy contacting
travelers wherever they are.
I cover the technical aspects of station configuration and operation in Part IV.
(For more technical stuff, see the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site.) In this
chapter, you find out about the different ways to conduct these relaxing con­
tacts. Like most things in life, with making casual contacts, “there’s kindy a
knack to it,” as my dear Aunt Lexie used to say.
Before I start on this operating business, though, allow me to suggest that
you get a copy of the FCC rules. You can download them from the FCC Web
site or bookmark the URL (for reference), but the rules you find there, as writ­
ten, are not altogether easy to figure out. For a clearer alternative, you can
get The FCC Rule Book from the ARRL (www.arrl.org) for only a few dollars.

118 Part III: Hamming It Up
This rule book conveniently includes not only the rules themselves, but also
a clear discussion on do’s and don’ts, and information on technical standards
and the FCC Universal Licensing System. New hams should really have a copy
in their shack.

Operating on FM and Repeaters
Most new hams start out as Technician class licensees, which gives you
access to the entire amateur VHF and UHF bands. By far the most common
means of communicating on those bands is through the use of an FM
repeater (see Chapter 8).

Finding a repeater
Figure 9-1 explains the general idea behind a repeater. A repeater retransmits
(or repeats) FM signals that it hears on one frequency and simultaneously
retransmits them on another frequency. The received signals are not stored
and played back; they’re re-broadcast on a different frequency at the same
time they’re received, which is called duplex operation.
Repeaters use FM instead of SSB because of the relative simplicity of the trans­
mitters and receivers — an important consideration for equipment that is
operating all the time and needs to be reliable. FM is also relatively immune
from static if signal strength is good and so makes for a more pleasant contact.
Except for a small segment of the 10-meter band, FM is rarely found on HF due
to restrictions on signal bandwidth and FM’s relatively poor quality on weak
signals compared to SSB and CW. Above 30 MHz however, FM’s qualities are
ideal for local and regional coverage.
If the repeater is located on a high building, tower, or hill, its sensitive receiver
picks up signals clearly from even tiny, handheld radios. It then uses a power­
ful transmitter to relay that input signal over a wide area. Stations can be sep­
arated by tens of miles, yet communicate with each other using just a watt or
two of power by using a repeater.
Ham radio repeaters are constructed and maintained by either a radio club
or private individual as a service to the ham community. If one exists in your
area, consider joining or supporting a repeater user’s group or club in order
to help defray the cost of keeping the repeater on the air.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
Repeater
(on a high building or hill)

Portables transmit on
Repeater Input
Frequency

Portables listen on
Repeater Output
Frequency

Input
Frequency

Receiver

Output
Frequency

Transmitter

Repeater retransmits received
audio on its Output Frequency
Figure 9-1:
The basic
repeater
system.

Portable
or Mobile
Radio

Transmitting and receiving on
different frequencies is called
DUPLEX OPERATION

Portable
or Mobile
Radio

To make repeater communications work, you have to know the frequency
on which a repeater listens and where it is transmitting. The listening fre­
quency (the one that listens for your signal) is called the repeater’s input
frequency and the frequency that you listen to is called the repeater’s output
frequency. The difference between the two frequencies is called the repeater’s
separation or offset. The combination of a repeater’s input and output frequen­
cies is called a repeater pair.
As Figure 9-2 shows, the repeater pairs are organized in groups with their
inputs in one part of the band and their outputs in another, all of them having
a common separation. Each pair leapfrogs its neighbor, with each input or
output channel separated by the same frequency, the channel spacing. The
input may be a lower frequency than the output or vice versa.

119

120 Part III: Hamming It Up
Repeater Separation or Offset

Repeater
pair

1
in

2
in

3
in

4
in

5
in

6
in

1
out

2
out

3
out

4
out

5
out

6
out

Channel
spacing

Figure 9-2:
Repeater
input and
output
frequency
pairs.

Portable
or Mobile
Radio

Portable
or Mobile
Radio

Figure 9-3 shows where the repeater segments of the five primary VHF/UHF
bands are located. The 6-meter band has three groups of repeaters: 51.12 to
51.98 MHz, 52 to 53 MHz, and 53 to 54 MHz. The 2-meter band also has three
groups: 144.6 to 145.5 MHz, 146 to 147 MHz, and 147 to 148 MHz. You can find
a single group on the 222, 440, and 1296 MHz bands. Repeaters are allowed on
the 902 MHz and 2304 MHz bands, but are not common. If you have a license
with HF privileges, you may want to give the 10-meter FM repeaters a try with
output frequencies between 29.610 and 29.700 MHz and an offset of –100 kHz.
Not all channels are occupied in every area and some variations are around
the country as to channel spacing and, in rare cases, offset. In order to find
out where the repeater inputs and outputs are for a specific area, you need a
repeater directory (see Chapter 8 for more on repeater directories). The
online directory at www.artscipub.com/repeaters/welcome.html is a
good resource to locate nearby repeaters.
If you don’t have a repeater directory and are just tuning across the band, try
using the following table. Table 9-1 lists the most common output frequencies
and repeater offsets to try. Tune to different output frequencies and listen for
activity. Remember: You have to set your radio’s offset appropriately for
each band.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
50

51.12-51.98

6-Meter
Band

In

52-53

Out

In

Group 1

144
2-Meter
Band

Figure 9-3:
Repeater
allocations
on the five
primary
VHF/UHF
bands.

144.6

1-1/4
Meter
Band

442-445
70-cm
Band

In/Out

Out

In

Group 2

145.5
In

53-53.98

147
In

Out

Group 1

Group 2

222.25-223.38

224.85-224.98

Inputs

Outputs

447-449.99
Out/In

Out

Group 3

146.01

Out

54

147.99
In

Out
Group 3

1270-1276

1282-1288

In

Out

13-cm
Band

All frequencies are in MHz

Table 9-1

Repeater Channel Spacings and Offsets

Band

Output Frequencies of
Each Group (In MHz)

Offset from Output to
Input Frequency

6-meters

51.62–51.98

– 500 kHz

52.5–52.98
53.5–53.98
2-meters (a mix of 20 and
15 kHz channel spacing)

220 MHz

145.2–145.5

– 600 kHz

146.61–147.00

– 600 kHz

147.00–147.39

+ 600 kHz

223.85–224.98

– 1.6 MHz
(continued)

121

122 Part III: Hamming It Up
Table 9-1 (continued)
Band

Output Frequencies of
Each Group (In MHz)

Offset from Output to
Input Frequency

440 MHz (local options
determine whether inputs
are above or below outputs)

442–445 (California
repeaters start at
440 MHz)

+ 5 MHz

447–450

– 5 MHz

1282–1288

– 12 MHz

1296 MHz

Using tone access and DCS
In order to minimize interference from other repeaters and strong nearby sig­
nals, most repeaters now use tone-access. The tones are also known as subaudible, PL, or CTCSS (Continuous Tone Coded Squelch System). You may
have used tone-access on the popular Family Radio Service (FRS) and General
Mobile Radio Service (GMRS) radios as privacy codes. Tone-access keeps a
repeater or radio output quiet or squelched for all signals except ones carrying
the proper tone.
Regardless of the name, tone-access works like this: When you transmit to a
repeater, you must add a low frequency tone between 69 and 255 Hz to your
voice. (You can find a list of these tones in your radio’s operating manual.)
When the repeater receives your transmission, it checks your voice for the
correct tone. If it detects the correct tone, the repeater forwards your voice
to the repeater output. This system prevents interfering signals from activat­
ing the repeater transmitter — these signals won’t carry the correct tone
signal and thus are excluded from transmission. For a more detailed discus­
sion of tone-access, see the ARRL Handbook or the December 1996 QST arti­
cle, “Decoding the Secrets of CTCSS,” by Ken Collier KO6UX.
Many recent radio models have a tone decoder function that detects which
repeater is using a given tone. However, if your radio doesn’t have this func­
tion, and you don’t know the correct tone, you can’t use the repeater. How
can you find out what the proper tone is? Check with a repeater directory,
which lists the tone and other vital statistics about the repeater. When you
determine the correct tone — either via the tone decoder function or the
repeater directory, you can then program your radio to send the correct tone
and activate the repeater.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
DCS (Digital Coded Squelch) is, like tone-access, another method for reducing
interference. It allows you to hear audio from only selected individuals. DCS
consists of a continuous sequence of low-frequency tones that accompanies
the transmitted voice. If your receiver is set to the same code sequence, it
passes the audio to the radio’s speaker. If the transmission uses a different
code, your radio remains silent. Most people use DCS to keep from having to
listen to all of the chatter on a repeater, only hearing the audio of others
using the same DCS code.
Be aware that not all repeaters pass the tone-access or DCS tones through to
the transmitter and may filter them out.

Using simplex
When one station calls another without the aid of a repeater, both stations
listen and talk on the same frequency, just as contacts are made on the HF
bands, which is called simplex operation. Hams use simplex when they’re just
making a local contact over a few miles and don’t need to use a repeater.
Interspersed with the repeater frequency bands in Figure 9-1 are small sets of
channels designated for simplex operation.
Having a common simplex channel is a good way for a local group of hams to
keep in touch. Simplex frequencies are usually less busy than repeater fre­
quencies and have a smaller coverage area, which makes them useful as local
or town intercoms. Clubs and informal groups often decide to keep their
radios tuned to a certain simplex frequency just for this purpose. If they’re
not having a meeting or conducting some other business, feel free to make a
short call (“NØAX this is W7FMI”) and make a friend.
On bands with a lot of space, such as the VHF and UHF bands, making con­
tacts outside of the repeater channels is easier if you know approximately
where the other hams are. That’s the purpose of calling frequencies — to get
contacts started. You hear hams call CQ (the general “come in, anybody”
call) on a calling frequency and, after establishing a contact, move to a
nearby frequency to complete it. For example, if I call CQ on 52.525 MHz and
N6TR answers me, I say, “N6TR from NØAX, hi Larry, let’s move to five-four,
OK?” This transaction means I receive N6TR and am tuning to 52.54 MHz, a
secondary simplex frequency.
Making a couple of complete contacts on calling frequencies is okay if the
band isn’t busy, but otherwise move to a nearby frequency.

123

124 Part III: Hamming It Up
A national FM simplex calling frequency is set aside on each band just for
general “Anybody want to chat?” calls. These frequencies are 52.525, 146.52,
223.50, 446.00, and 1294.5 MHz. When driving long distances, I often check
these channels to meet up with other travelers on the highways. Visitors to
your area often tune to these frequencies, so monitoring them is a good way
to make travelers feel welcome or give directions.
If you are traveling and want to make a contact on the simplex calling fre­
quencies, the best way to do so is to make a transmission similar to this one:
“This is NØAX November Zero Alpha X-ray mobile on Interstate 90.
Anybody around?”
Repeat this transmission a couple of times, spaced a few seconds apart. If
you are moving, try making a call once every five minutes or so. Be sure to
tell listeners you’re traveling and your approximate direction. If you are oper­
ating away from your home area, add “portable” or “portable (call district
number)” to your call as an additional bit of information.
Because simplex communications don’t take advantage of a repeater’s lofty
position and powerful signal, you may have to listen harder than usual on
these frequencies. Keep your squelch setting just above the noise level.
When you’re making a call, you may want to open the squelch completely,
so you can hear a weak station responding.
Solid simplex communications usually require more power and better
antennas than a typical hand-held radio, at least on one end of the contact.
To get better results on simplex with just a few watts, try using a mobile
antenna, a full-size ground plane, or a small beam. I discuss these antennas
in Chapter 12.

Setting up your radio
After you figure out offsets, tones, and repeater frequencies, take a few min­
utes and check out your radio’s operating manual. To make repeater (or sim­
plex) contacts, you need to know how to do each of the following:
 Set the radio’s receive frequency and transmit offset. Know how to
switch to simplex (no offset) or to listen on the repeater’s input
frequency.
 Turn sub-audible tones on or off and change the tone. If your radio
has the capability, know how to determine what tone frequency is
being used.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
 Turn the Digital Squelch System on or off and change the codes.
 Store the radio settings in a memory channel and access different
memory channels.

Contacts, FM style
Operating and making contacts on FM is sufficiently different from the style of
SSB or CW that it can confuse new licensees. Because VHF and UHF FM voice
contacts are usually local or regional, they tend to be for personal utility,
rather than to make random acquaintances. Most hams have a few favorite
repeaters or simplex frequencies that they use as a sort of regional intercom.
They turn on a radio in the shack at home or in the car and monitor a chan­
nel or two to keep an ear out for family or friends. Even though a number of
people may be monitoring a repeater, they mostly just listen unless someone
calls them specifically or they hear a request for information or help.
This style can be a little off-putting to hams new to FM and can even seem
unfriendly at times. Rest assured that the hams are not being unfriendly,
they’re just not in “meet and greet” mode on the repeater or a favorite sim­
plex channel. Imagine the difference between meeting someone at a party
versus at a grocery store. At the party, everyone makes new acquaintances
and has conversations. At the store, people aren’t there as a social exercise
and may even seem a little brusque. Keeping this idea in mind, the following
sections cover some suggestions to help get some experience with the
FM style.

Joining the group
The best way to become acquainted with a group is to participate in its activ­
ities. Nets are a very common group use of FM repeaters.
The most common nets on FM are for emergency services groups, weather
and traffic (the automobile kind), and equipment swap meets. Technical
assistance nets exist as well as nets that handle radiograms into and out of
your area. (I discuss traffic handling in Chapter 10.) Use the ARRL net search
Web page at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/nets/client/netsearch.html
to find local nets on the VHF and UHF bands. Your Elmer may be able to help
you out with times and frequencies, as well.
Almost all nets call for visitors, generally at the end of the net session, and
that’s your chance. When you check in (all you have to do is give your call
sign and maybe your name), ask for an after-net contact with the net control
station or a station that had something of interest to you. After-net contacts

125

126 Part III: Hamming It Up
are initiated on the net frequency after the net is completed. Sometimes they
are held on the net frequency and other times the stations establish contact
there and move to a different frequency.
During the after-net QSO, you can introduce yourself and ask for help in find­
ing other nets in the area. If you have specific interests, ask if the station
knows of other nets on similar topics. Hopefully, you get a referral and maybe
even a couple of call signs to contact for information.
By checking into a few nets, your call sign starts to become familiar and you
have a new set of friends. If you can contribute to a weather or traffic net, or
accept a radiogram destined for your town or neighborhood, by all means do
so. Contributing your time and talents helps you become part of the on-theair community in no time.

Seizing the opportunity
As you monitor the different channels, which repeaters encourage conversa­
tions and which don’t becomes apparent. If you can identify a repeater that is
ragchew-friendly, you have a fairly easy time making a few casual contacts.
Listen for a station accessing the repeater, which sounds something like:
“NØAX monitoring” or “NØAX for a contact.” When you hear that, respond
with a quick one-by-two call using phonetics, such as “NØAX this is KD7DQO,
Kilo Delta Seven Delta Queen Ocean, over.” By convention, calling CQ is
reserved for SSB and CW operations where you’re not sure who is out there
and signals are generally weaker. To fit in with FM’s intercom style, just make
short transmissions.
Continue your contact as you do other contacts (see Chapter 8), but keeping
your transmissions short is important. Repeaters have a time-out function
that disables the transmitter if the input is busy for more than just a few
(typically three to five) minutes. This time-out function prevents overheating
the transmitter and also keeps a long-winded speaker from locking out other
users. When you’re transmitting, if you let up on the mike switch and no
repeater signal comes back, you may have timed-out the repeater. Just let
the repeater rest for 10 or 15 seconds and the receiver re-enables and the
timer resets. No need to be embarrassed (unless you keep doing it) because
all hams have done it more than once.

Open and closed
If you purchase a repeater directory, you may see some repeaters are marked
as closed, and are not open to the ham radio public. Some repeaters are closed
because they are dedicated to a specific purpose, such as emergency com­
munications. Some repeaters are intended to be used by only a supporting

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
group. Rest assured that you can use a closed repeater in case of emergency,
but respect the wishes of its ownership and don’t use it for casual operation.
If you aren’t sure whether the repeater is closed or not, transmit to it and ask,
“This is NØAX, is a control operator on frequency?” If you get a response, that’s
the person to ask.

Repeater features
You can find an amazing set of features out there in repeater land. Many
repeaters have voice synthesizers that identify the repeater and announce
the time and temperature. Hams using the repeater can activate and deacti­
vate some functions, such as autopatch and automated announcements of
time or temperature, by using Touch-Tone tones from the keypads commonly
found on microphones. Repeaters are linked together to provide wide cover­
age even across bands.
In the next few sections, I only touch on the basics of repeater operation and
features. Repeaters are widely used all over the world and a wealth of other
information is available for you to consult as you grow more experienced and
curious about repeater and FM operations. Check the following Web sites for
more information:
 AC6V Web site (www.ac6v.com/repeaters.htm): This site offers com­
prehensive links on many different ham radio topics.
 eHam.net (www.eham.net/newham): This ham radio portal includes
numerous areas of interest to hams, including a handy New Ham page.
Click the Basic Operating link for information about repeater operating.
 ARRL Technical Information Services (www.arrl.org/tis/info/
repeater.html): This site has many public links and numerous in-depth
articles for ARRL members.
 K1HWU Ham Links (www.k1dwu.net/ham-links/repeaters.phtml):
This site offers a lot of links to repeater groups in the United States.

Autopatch
The best known feature of repeaters is called autopatch. This feature allows
a repeater user to make a telephone call through the repeater! By accessing
a repeater’s autopatch function, a dial tone appears on the air. When you
use the numeric keypad commonly found on your radio or microphone, the
tones feed through the telephone system, which dials the number and con­
nects you.
All autopatch calls occur over the air — they’re not private.

127

128 Part III: Hamming It Up
Although you can do a lot of important things with autopatch — most hams
use it to call 911 to report accidents, for example — you should use this func­
tion wisely. You must use special access codes to activate the feature. To
get these codes, you may be required to join the club or group that maintains
the repeater. Some limits are in place on what you are allowed to do via
autopatch. For example, conducting business is forbidden as on any amateur
frequency. (You can perform a limited amount of personal business, such as
calling a store or — my favorite — ordering a pizza.) And most repeater sys­
tems place strict limits on the area codes that you can dial to prevent incur­
ring long-distance charges.
With mobile phone service nearly ubiquitous today, autopatch is not the
unique capability it once was. Even so, in certain conditions, like if your cell­
phone can’t find a suitable service provider or if the mobile phone systems
are overloaded or unreachable, autopatch may be able to get through.
If your radio has the autopatch feature and you obtain the tone sequences,
follow these steps to make a phone call (the exact steps may vary from
repeater to repeater):
1. In an emergency, break in to an ongoing contact and ask the stations
to stand by for an emergency autopatch.
If it is not an emergency, wait until the channel is clear.
2. Tell the repeater you’re switching to autopatch and without releasing
the microphone button on the microphone, press the activation
sequence of tones. Release the mike button.
For example, if your call sign is NØAX, you say, “NØAX accessing
autopatch,” and press *82 or #11.
3. The repeater acknowledges your sequence with some kind of tone,
synthesized voice, or maybe just the telephone system dial tone.
If you don’t hear an acknowledging transmission, go back to Step 2. You
may have trouble if your signal is fluttery or noisy.
You can also ask for another repeater user to activate the autopatch
function for you.
4. When you hear the dial tone, press the tone keys for the number you
want to dial.
You may have to precede the telephone number with a dialing code,
depending on the repeater’s specific operating requirements.
5. When someone answers your call, tell him or her you’re using a radio.
For example, you can say, “This is (your name) and I am using an ama­
teur radio autopatch system.” This transmission lets him or her know

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
that a radio link is involved so you both can’t talk at once. Emergency
services dispatch operators are generally familiar with autopatch, but
pizza delivery operators may not be.
6. Transmit your message.
Keep it short and appropriate for a public conversation.
7. When you finish, key in the hang-up tones (if needed) while keeping
the mike button pressed and tell the repeater you’re disabling
autopatch.
For example, say “This is NØAX releasing autopatch.”
8. The repeater acknowledges the release with an announcement similar
to that at activation.
9. (Optional) You may let the other repeater users know that you are fin­
ished and can resume normal operation.

Repeater networks
Some repeaters can be linked together in networks that provide coverage
over wide areas. For example, the system of repeaters known as the Cactus
Inter-tie allows users to communicate using their local repeater in an area
that covers Los Angeles to the east and north as far as Texas and Utah,
respectively. In my area, the Evergreen Inter-tie links repeaters throughout
the Pacific Northwest and Canada. The Target Repeater System hooks up
hams from Ohio through Virginia. Many more of these networks exist, as evi­
denced by the list at www.qsl.net/w9sar/repeaters.html. Repeaters may
be linked at all times or only under the control of authorized operators.
To use these systems, you need to find out which local repeaters are “on the
inter-tie,” usually by browsing the Web site for the repeater system. If you
decide to become a member of the group that maintains the network, you get
access to the control tone sequences that activate the network connections.
You can usually find the necessary information about joining a group on its
Web site; or you can listen for a group member controlling the repeater and
give him or her a call. Membership requirements and expectations vary, so
be sure you can meet them before signing up. Setting up a repeater link
across several states from a hand-held radio is pretty neat!

Linking repeaters with the Internet
The latest advance in repeater linking is a novel hybrid system that marries
the VHF/UHF repeater to the Internet. Several systems allow repeater users in
one spot to tunnel through the Internet and pop up somewhere very far away,
indeed! IRLP, iLINK, and Wires II are all examples of such systems. I use IRLP
to illustrate the concept.

129

130 Part III: Hamming It Up
IRLP uses Voice-Over-IP (VOIP) technology to connect repeaters all over the
world. This technology allows hams with hand-held portables to chat with
more than 20 other countries around the world in more than 30 countries as
of late 2003. You can even find IRLP on Ross Island in Antarctica! Figure 9-4
shows the basic IRLP system.
A node is a regular FM repeater with an Internet link for relaying digitized
voice. A user or control operator can direct an IRLP node to connect to
any other IRLP node. When the node-to-node connection is made, the audio
on the two repeaters is exchanged, just as if both users were talking on the
same repeater. Having contacts between Europe and New Zealand with
hams on both ends using hand-held radios putting out just a watt or two
is common!
You can also connect several nodes together using an IRLP reflector. The
reflector exchanges digitized audio data from any node in real time with several other nodes. Even a user without a radio can join in by logging on to an
IRLP reflector or node. All users that cause radio transmissions to be made
have to be licensed though.

Local
contact via
VHF/UHF

Local
contact via
VHF/UHF
PC-based
IRLP node

PC-based
IRLP node

Local
Repeater

IRLP
node

Local
Repeater

IRLP
node

relayed
voice

Figure 9-4:
The basic Internet
IRLP
system.

IRLP
"Reflector"

Digitized Voice
via Internet
relayed voice

Web
user

IRLP
node

relayed voice
IRLP
node

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
Using the IRLP system is very much like using an autopatch system. You
don’t need anything more than your radio, the IRLP system control tone
sequences for your repeater, and a list of the four-digit node on-codes that
form the IRLP address of active IRLP repeaters. To connect to another
IRLP-enabled repeater, follow these steps:
1. Enter an IRLP access code.
The access code sets up the repeater to accept an IRLP on-code. This
process is just like activating autopatch.
2. When the repeater indicates that the IRLP system is ready, enter the
tones that send the on-code of the repeater that you wish to connect to.
Enter the tone is just like entering a telephone number into an autopatch
system. You can find a list of the available IRLP nodes and their on-codes
at status.irlp.net.
3. After a short delay, the node you connected to identifies itself in plain
voice with a call sign and location and you are connected!
Any transmissions you make transmit on the remote node and you hear
all the audio from the other node. If the other node is busy with another
IRLP connection, you hear a message to that effect. Try another node or
come back later.
4. When you finish, use the IRLP control codes to disconnect, as with an
autopatch.
You can get more complete information on the IRLP system through several
Web resources. An introductory article at www.eham.net/newham/irlp gives
a good overview of the system. If you’re really interested in the complete
technical details and maybe even putting together your own IRLP node, the
IRLP home site at www.irlp.net has complete details.
For more information on other Internet-linking of voice systems, check out
the following URLs:
 iLINK: www.geocities.com/gj7jhf/ilinking.html
 Wires II: www.vxstd.com/en/wiresinfo-en
 Echolink: www.echolink.org

Chewing the Rag
I first mentioned ragchewing in Chapter 8 as a likely way that you make your
first contacts. In this section, I go into a little deeper detail about the ham eti­
quette of the ragchew.

131

132 Part III: Hamming It Up
Knowing where to chew
You know enough about ham radio that you can’t just spin the dial and start
bellowing into a microphone. Although ragchewing isn’t listed on any band
plan, you can find ragchewers on certain parts of every band.
On the HF frequencies below 30 MHz, the bands all have a very similar struc­
ture: CW (Morse code) and data modes occupy roughly the lower third and
voice modes occupy the upper two-thirds. This structure is true even on the
WARC bands of 17 and 12 meters where no formal division between the modes
is made.
Figure 9-5 shows how the general operating styles are organized on a typical
HF band. You find the ragchewers mixed in with the DX contacts on the lower
end of the band. Sometimes, if a super-rare station comes on the air, the
sheer numbers of DXers calling crowd a sustained contact (a pileup), so the
ragchewers move up the band. The ragchewers space themselves out around
the nets, round tables, calling frequencies, and data signals, taking advantage
of ham radio’s unique frequency agility to find an empty spot on the band.

Figure 9-5:
The general
operating
conventions
on the HF
bands
illustrated
on 20meters.

Lower
Band
Edge

Upper
Band
Edge
CW and Data

DX-ing

Voice Modes

Data

Ragchews

DX-ing

Nets

Ragchews

What’s a WARC?
WARC refers to the international World
Administrative Radio Conference of 1979. At that
conference, amateurs worldwide were granted
access to three new bands: 30, 17, and 12

meters. These new bands were immediately
nicknamed the WARC bands to distinguish them
from the older ham bands at 160, 80, 40, 20, 15,
and 10 meters.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
DX-ing takes place at the lower end of the band for two primary reasons:
 Long-distance contacts are generally more difficult to make than
regional or local contacts. The signals are weaker and DX enthusiasts
find each other easier if they tend to operate in one area of the band.
 After the bands were divided into different sub-bands for the differ­
ent license classes, fewer higher-class operators were in the lowest
segments of the bands. The rarer DX stations took advantage of the
lesser population of U.S. hams in those lower band segments to reduce
the crowd pursuing them on the air.
Because DX-ing tends to attract a crowd, this concept is somewhat incompat­
ible with the more ordered operating style of nets. Therefore, those types of
operations would gather at the “other end” of the bands. With this structure,
groups can engage in their preferred style of operating without interference.
Data and Morse code styles tend to be incompatible and so the data signals,
such as radioteletype (RTTY) or PSK, also stay towards the higher portion of
the band. Not many nets use Morse code and data, so data signals don’t inter­
fere too much.
You may think that ragchewers are buffeted from all sides, but that’s not
really the case. A lot of ragchew contacts take place all the time and so they
tend to occupy just about any spare bit of band. To be sure, in the case of
emergencies (when a lot of nets are active), major expeditions to rare places,
or on weekends when big contests are running, the bands may seem too full
to get a word in edgewise.
The FCC can declare a communications emergency and designate certain
frequencies for emergency traffic and other communications. Keeping those
frequencies clear is every amateur’s responsibility. The ARRL broadcasts
special bulletins over the air on W1AW, by e-mail, and on its Web site if the
FCC does make such a declaration. The restrictions are in place until the FCC
lifts them.
On the VHF and UHF bands, you can usually find ragchewing in the repeater
sections of the bands, although wide open spaces for a conversation are
available in the so-called “weak signal” portions of the bands. Table 9-2 lists
the calling frequencies and portions of the VHF/UHF bands. The operating
style in this portion of the bands is similar to HF as far as calling CQ and
making random contacts, but the bands are less crowded.

133

134 Part III: Hamming It Up
Table 9-2

VHF/UHF Morse Code (CW) & SSB Calling Frequencies

Band

Frequencies (in MHz)

Use

6 Meters

50.0–50.3

CW & SSB

50.070, 50.090

CW Calling Frequencies

50.125 and 50.200

SSB Calling Frequency,
use Upper Sideband (USB)

144.0–144.3

CW & SSB

144.050

CW Calling Frequency

144.200

SSB Calling Frequency,
use USB

222.0–222.15

CW & SSB

222.100

CW & SSB Calling
Frequency, use USB

432.07–433.0

CW & SSB

432.100

CW & SSB Calling
Frequency, use USB

2 Meters

222 MHz (1-1/4 Meters)

440 MHz (70 cm)

The lower portion of the VHF/UHF bands is referred to as a weak signal
although that’s really a misnomer. The reason for the name is that contacts
using CW and SSB can be made with considerably weaker signals than on FM.
Most of the CW and SSB signals you hear are quite sufficiently strong for
excellent contacts, thank you!

Knowing when to chew
Whether you’re on HF or VHF/UHF, you find ragchewing has its good times
and poor times. When calling CQ (signifying that you want to talk to any
station), you can let it be known that you’re looking for an extended contact
in a number of ways. You also hear numerous clues that a ragchew may not
be what another station has in mind.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
I keep coming back to this point, but listening is the best way to learn operat­
ing procedures in ham radio. The most important part of any amateur’s sta­
tion is between the ears! If you want to call CQ successfully, then spend some
time listening to more experienced hams do it.

The good times
Assuming that you’re tuning an open band (signals are coming in from vari­
ous points), when is a good time to ragchew? First, consider the social
aspects of your contact timing. Weekdays are generally pretty good days to
ragchew, especially the daylight hours when hams that have day jobs are at
work. Remember: It may be a different time of day at the other end of the
contact, particularly if the other station is DX.
You may want to revisit Chapter 8 when considering what band is best to use.
If you like to talk regionally, you can always use a repeater or one of the lower
HF bands. To talk coast-to-coast, one of the higher bands is your best bet.
The better your antenna system, the more options you have.
Lots of hams do their operating on weekends, but that’s also when special
events and contests are held. Be prepared for a full band on Saturday and
Sunday every weekend of the year. The silver lining to the cloud is that plenty
of hams are on the air for you to contact! If you know that one mode or band
is host to some major event, you can almost always find a quiet spot on the
other mode or other bands. The WARC bands never have contests and are
usually wide open for ragchews and casual operating.

Not-so-good times
Because a good ragchew lasts for a long time, pick a time and band that offer
stable conditions. Propagation changes rapidly around sunrise and sunset.
Local noon can be difficult on the higher bands. Don’t be afraid to try any old
time; you may surprise yourself and you’ll learn about propagation from the
best teacher — experience!
Because weekends are busy times, you should check the contest and specialevent calendars (see Chapter 10). A little advance warning helps keep you
from being surprised when you get on the air and allows you to be flexible in
your operating.

135

136 Part III: Hamming It Up
When the bands seem frustratingly full, here are some helpful strategies that
keep you doing your thing:
 The majority of nets and all contests are run on the traditional bands.
The WARC bands almost always have sufficient space for a QSO.
 Only a few contests sponsor activity on both phone and CW. No con­
tests have activity on phone, CW, and data. You can change modes and
enjoy a nice ragchew.
 Be sure you know how to operate your receiver. Cut back on the RF
sensitivity, use your narrower filter settings, know how to use controls
such as the IF Shift or Passband Tuning controls, and generally be a
sharp operator. You can remove much interference and noise just by
using all the adjustments your receiver provides.
 Always have a backup plan! There’s no guarantee that any particular
frequency is clear on any given day. Hams have “frequency freedom”
second to none, so use that big knob on the front of your radio!

Identifying a ragchewer
If you’re in the mood for a ragchew and you’re tuning the bands, how can you
tell if a station wants to ragchew? The easiest way is finding an ongoing
ragchew and joining it. You can break in (see Chapter 8) or wait until one sta­
tion is signing off and then call the remaining station.
Otherwise, the key is in the CQ. Cues that the other station is looking to
ragchew include a relaxed tone of voice and an easy tempo of speaking. Look
for a station that has a solid signal — not necessarily a needle-pinning strong
station, but one that is easy to copy and has a steady signal strength. The
best ragchews are contacts that last long enough for you to get past the
opening pleasantries, so find a signal that you think can hold up.
One cue that the station is not looking for a ragchew is a targeted call. For
example, you may hear, “CQ New York, CQ New York from W7VMI.” W7VMI
likely has some kind of errand or message and is interested in getting the job
done. Perhaps the station is calling, “CQ DX” or “CQ Mobiles,” in which case,
if you’re not one of the target populations, keep on tuning.
Another not-a-ragchew cue is a hurried call or a call that has lots of stations
responding. This station may be in a rare spot, in a contest, or at a special
event. Keep on tuning if you’re really looking for a ragchew.
Evaluate on-the-air technique as you tune across the bands. Consider what
you like and dislike about the various styles. Take what you like and try to
make it better — that’s the amateur way.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
Sharing a ragchew
Hams come from all walks of life and have all kinds of personalities, of
course, so you come across the garrulous, for whom a ragchew that doesn’t
last an hour is too short, and the mike-shy ham that considers more than a
signal report to be a ragchew. Relax and enjoy the different people you meet!
Round tables are also great ways to have a ragchew. These are contacts
between three or more hams on a single frequency. Imagine getting together
with your friends for lunch. If only one of you could talk at a time, that’s a
round table! These aren’t formal, like nets, and generally just go “around the
circle” with each station talking in turn. Stations can sign off and join in at
any time.

Pounding Brass — Morse Code
CW is a lot easier to learn and copy if you are equipped to listen to it properly.
For starters, using headphones (cans) really helps because they block out dis­
tracting noise. When you are copying code, your brain evaluates every little
bit of sound your ears receive, so make its job easier by limiting the non-code
sounds. Warning: Settling on one preferred pitch for the tones is natural, but
over long periods of time, you can “wear out” your ear at this pitch. Keep the
volume down and try different pitches so you don’t fatigue your hearing.
When you have a comfortable audio environment, be sure your radio is set
up properly, too. Most radios come with a receiving filter intended for use
with voice signals. Typically, a voice filter is 2.4 kHz wide (meaning that it
passes a portion of radio spectrum or audio that spans 2.4 kHz) to pass the
human voice clearly. CW doesn’t need all that bandwidth. A filter 500 Hz wide
is a better choice and you can purchase one as an accessory whether your
radio is new or used. The narrower filter removes nearby signals and noise
that interfere with the desired signal. In fact, four or five code signals can
happily coexist in the bandwidth occupied by a single voice signal!
Narrower is not necessarily better below 400–500 Hz. A very narrow filter,
such as 250 Hz models, may allow you to slice your radio’s view of the spec­
trum very thin, but the tradeoff is an un-natural ringy sound to the signal. You
are less able to hear what’s going on around your frequency. These extranarrow filters are useful when interference or noise is severe, but use a wider
filter for regular use.
Be sure to read through your radio’s operating manual sections on CW
operation. Find out how to use all of the filter adjustment controls, such as
the IF Shift and Passband Tuning controls. Most CW operators like to set the

137

138 Part III: Hamming It Up
AGC control to the FAST setting, so that the radio receiver recovers rapidly.
Being able to get the most out of your receiver is just as important on CW as
when using voice.
If your radio has the ability to switch rapidly between transmit and receive,
then the full-breakin mode (or QSK) is something you’ll want to try. In this
mode, you can hear what’s happening on the band between the dits and
dahs. You have to turn off VOX operation that holds the radio in transmit.

Copying the code
To get really comfortable with CW, you need to copy in your head. Watching
a good operator having a conversation without writing down a word is an
eye-opener. How do they do that? The answer is practice.
As your code speed increases during the learning process, you gradually
achieve the ability to process whole groups of characters as one group of
sound. Copying in your head just takes that to another level. To get there,
spend some time just listening to code on the air without writing anything
down. Without the need to respond to the sender, you can relax and not get
all tensed up trying not to miss a character. Soon, you can hold more and
more of the contact in your head without diminishing your copying ability.
When you try it for real, use a piece of paper; not to write down all the char­
acters, but to jot down topics and information for your part of the next trans­
mission. Resist the temptation to write each letter on the paper. Soon you’re
ready for the next step, copying behind.
Read some more mail on the bands, trying to relax as much as possible with­
out staying right up with each character. Don’t force the meaning and let your
brain give it to you when it’s ready. Gradually the meaning pops into your
head farther and farther behind the characters as they’re actually received.
What’s happening is that your brain is doing its own form of error correcting,
making sure that what you copy makes sense and taking cues from previous
words and characters to fill in any blanks.
Good copying ability sneaks up on you over time. When you really hit a
groove, you’re barely conscious of the copying process at all and, voila!,
CW is your second language.

Sending Morse
You may think that sending ability automatically follows receiving ability. To
some extent, that’s true, but after listening to other operators on the air,

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
you’ll find a wide range of sending ability. Having a good, smooth sending
style, or fist, is not hard.
First decide what type of device you want to use to send code. The basic tele­
graph key or straight key seen in Figure 9-6 is heard on the bands every day,
but sending good code at high speed with one is challenging. The straight key
tops out somewhere between 20 and 30 words per minute (wpm). At these
speeds, sending becomes a full-body experience and you really have to be
skilled to make it sound good. The straight key has a few variants — the sideswiper, for example, in which a keying lever is moved back and forth. Still,
manual keying on a sideswiper tops out around 30 wpm.
You can find several better options. Before the advent of inexpensive elec­
tronics, fast code was sent with an automatic key, now known as a bug, and
shown in the middle of Figure 9-6. They’re called bugs because the largest
manufacturer, Vibroplex (www.vibroplex.com), uses the lightning bug as its
symbol. A cautionary note: Bugs are rarely heard today, which makes their
rhythm unusual and hard to copy, especially in the fist of an unskilled opera­
tor. You still make the dashes manually by pressing the keying paddle to the
left, but dots are now made by a vibrating lever attached to a pair of contacts.
A weight sliding along the lever determines the speed of the dots. These
vibrating-lever contraptions have a distinctive sound all their own, a synco­
pation known as swing.
As vacuum tubes miniaturized and transistors came on the scene in the
mid-1960s, electronic keyers were created. These devices generate dots and
dashes electronically, when a dot contact or dash contact is closed for as
long as the contact stays closed. The simplest electronic keyers only make
strings of dits and dahs and the operator puts them together with the right
timing. More sophisticated keyers make sure that the spacing between dits
and dahs is correct and can even send alternating dits and dahs if both con­
tacts are closed at the same time. These keyers are called iambic keyers
because of the didahdidahdidah pattern they make. Because of the way
Morse characters are constructed, a skilled keyer makes fewer hand move­
ments using an iambic keyer. The devices used to send code with keyers are
called paddles (shown in Figure 9-6) after the flat ovals touched by the opera­
tor. A good operator can send well over 60 wpm with an electronic keyer
and comfortable paddle!
Collectors of Morse code equipment extend far beyond the ham radio com­
munity. Railroad and telegraph aficionados have terrific collections of old
keys, bugs, and paddles. For an entry into the world of antique code, start at
the Sparks Telegraph Key Review (www.zianet.com/sparks). Morse Express
Books (www.mtechnologies.com/books) publishes excellent books about
keys and related equipment.

139

140 Part III: Hamming It Up
Combination Paddle & Key

Straight Key

Semi-automatic key or "Bug"

Figure 9-6:
My paddlekey combo,
a bug,
and the
venerable
straight key.

Straight Key Night is a fun event that brings out old and new code equipment
(and operators) around the world . Every year on New Year’s Eve, hams break
out their straight keys and bugs and return to the airwaves for a few old-time
QSOs before heading off to the evening’s frivolities. Auld lang syne and all
that, you know! An award is given for Best Fist, too. Give it a try this year!

Code by computer
A number of programs use a computer’s sound card to extract characters
from the code. Some of them can even copy more than one code stream at a
time! (Computers can go fast, but in the presence of noise or interference, a
human is still much better at copying.) Keying is done by a transistor inter­
face to the computer’s serial or parallel port. Personally, I prefer to send and
copy the code myself, but can’t begin to approach the speed at which com­
puters can handle Samuel’s invention. Review the list of Morse programs at
www.ac6v.com/morseprograms.htm to find a program to try out.

Chapter 9: Casual Operating

Making and responding
to Morse code calls
On the HF bands, you can always find code on the lower frequencies of the
band, even on bands not divided between code and non-code modes. The
faster operators tend to be at the very bottom of the bands, with average
code speed slowly dropping as you tune higher.
As you start, find an operator sending code at a speed you feel comfortable
receiving. Even though no new Novice licenses are being granted, a number
of slow-speed code operators are in the Novice sub-bands 3.675 to 3.725,
7.100 to 7.150, 21.100 to 21.200, and 28.100 to 28.300 MHz. Medium-speed
QSOs are the norm elsewhere; even mixed in with high-speed operators down
low in the band.
When sending a Morse code CQ (a general way to solicit a contact), don’t
send faster than you can receive. Having to ask the responding station to QRS
(slow down) because you hustled through your CQ is embarrassing.
The best CQ is one that’s long enough to attract the attention of a station
tuning by, but not so long that that station loses interest and tunes away
again. I have good luck with 3-by-2-by-3 CQs (CQ CQ CQ de NØAX NØAX,
repeated three times) on average. If the band is very quiet, you may want to
send longer and a busy band may only require a 2-by-2-by-2 CQ. You just have
to try different styles until you get a feel for what works.
If your radio has the ability to listen between the dits and dahs (your operat­
ing manual calls this the Break-in, or QSK, feature), use it to listen for a sta­
tion sending “dits” on your frequency. That means, “I hear you, so stop CQing
and let me call!” You can then finish up with “DE [your call] K” and the other
station can call right away.

Making Morse code contacts (CW)
Making code contacts, or CW, is a lot like making voice contacts in terms of
structure. Hams are hams, after all. What’s different about the Morse code
contact is the heavy use of abbreviations, shorthand, and prosigns (two-letter
combinations used to control the flow of a contact) to cut down the number
of characters you send. Find a complete list of CW abbreviations and
prosigns at ac6v.com/morseaids.htm.

141

142 Part III: Hamming It Up
After you begin a contact and exchange call signs, including your call sign
every time you turn the transmission over to the other station is not neces­
sary, but you must include it once every ten minutes as required by FCC
rules. Send your information and end with the BK prosign to signal the other
station that he or she can go ahead. This method is much more efficient than
sending call signs every time.
At the conclusion of a Morse code contact, after all the 73s (Best Regards)
and CULs (See You Later), be sure to close with the appropriate prosign: SK
for end of contact or CL if you’re going off the air. You may also hear the
other station send “shave and haircut” (dit-dididit-dit) and you are expected
to respond with “two bits” (dit dit). These rhythms are deeply ingrained in
ham radio and are even heard in spoken conversations between hams. I wrap
up many a chat with “diddly bump-de-bump,” the rhythm of SK, or just a
“dit dit” meaning, “See ya!” Yeah, it’s a little goofy, but have fun!

Morse code (CW) clubs
After you master Morse code, it stays with you forever and you may find it
the most pleasurable way of making contacts. A number of groups for Morse
code buffs are around the world. FISTS (www.fists.org), the International
Morse Preservation Society, has chapters around the world and is the largest
organization dedicated to Morse code. The British club First Class CW
Operator’s Club (www.firstclasscw.org.uk), or FOC, is quite exclusive
with only 500 active members at any given time, but is quite active. Enter
CW Club into an Internet search engine to find other smaller CW clubs.

Receiving Messages Afloat and Remote
Once upon a time, any kind of messaging capability was tied to specific
phone numbers, bulletin boards, and servers. If you weren’t in range of your
home bulletin board or service provider, then you were pretty much discon­
nected. Ham radio has left those days behind, just like wireless networks
have freed up the computer user.
Hams can use a computer and a radio to connect directly to gateway stations
around the world by terrestrial links on the HF bands, or by VHF and UHF to
the amateur satellites. The gateway stations transfer e-mail messages between
ham radio and the Internet. The satellites transfer messages to and from the

Chapter 9: Casual Operating
Internet via a ground control station. Either way, a ham far from home can
use ham radio to send and receive e-mail.
The best-known HF message system is Winlink 2000 (www.winlink.org),
which enables anyone with a Windows-based computer to send and receive
e-mail over ham radio links using the PACTOR or PACTOR II digital modes
(I cover digital modes in Chapter 11). A worldwide network of stations,
shown in Figure 9-7, operates on the 80, 40, 30, and 20 meter bands as well
as VHF packet. To find the frequencies for these stations, click the Winlink
Stations link on the Winlink home page. This extensive and growing network
covers much of Earth for most propagation conditions. These stations are
linked via the Internet, creating a global home for Winlink users.

Figure 9-7:
Winlink 2000
digital data
network
stations.

To use the Winlink 2000 system, you first must register as a user on the
Winlink network so that the system recognizes you when you connect. As a
recognized user, your messages are available from anywhere on Earth, via
whichever Winlink station you use to connect. You must also download and
install a Winlink-compatible e-mail program, such as AirMail, which is avail­
able via the Winlink Web site.
Along with a computer that runs the e-mail software, you also need a sound
card and software to send and receive PACTOR data or an external commu­
nications processor that can run PACTOR or PACTOR II. Your HF or VHF radio
connects to the Winlink station.

143

144 Part III: Hamming It Up
If you are using AirMail, the connection process is straightforward. Follow
these steps to connect:
1. Open the AirMail program.
2. Click the Terminal icon.
A menu of WinLink stations and frequencies pops up.
3. Select a station and frequency appropriate for your location, time of
day, and equipment.
The computer and radio attempts to connect to the WinLink server and
notifies you of success or failure. This process is very much like a modem
connecting to a remote server for a dialup connection.
After you connect to the Winlink 2000 system, your messages are available
anywhere. The data rate is limited due to the radio link, so don’t try to send
big files, but text messages go through just fine.
The usual regulations for ham radio messages apply, of course; you cannot
encrypt messages, send business traffic and obscene content, or use radio
links on behalf of third parties in countries where such use is prohibited. Also
keep in mind that while the Winlink stations are connected via the Internet,
your station is connected by a relatively slow digital data radio link. Avoid
large files and messages. Nevertheless, Winlink 2000 is a tremendous service
and a boon to those who travel off the beaten track.

Chapter 10

Operating with Intent
In This Chapter
 Registering with an emergency organization
 Getting ready for and operating in emergencies
 Rendering public service
 Transmitting on nets
 Delivering messages

A

s your experience with ham radio grows, you’ll find more and more
practical uses for your communications skills. Your ham radio skills can
also benefit others, which is where the service part of Amateur Radio Service
comes in.

In return for the privileges that go with the license — access to a broad range
of frequencies, protection from many forms of interference, maintenance of
technical standards, and enforcement of operating rules — the Amateur
Service gives back by providing emergency communications systems and
trained operators. In between emergencies, hams also provide communica­
tions support at public functions and sporting events, keep an eye on the
weather, and perform training exercises. And hams have an extensive mes­
sage handling network that runs every day of the year for both emergency
and ordinary messages.
These services are important to you for two reasons: You can use them and
you can provide them. In this chapter, you find out what those services are and
how to get started with the groups that provide them. This chapter is written
primarily for American and Canadian hams and describes the U.S. emergency
communications organizations. Elsewhere around the world, you can find simi­
lar organizations to varying degrees. Contact your national amateur radio soci­
ety for information about them.

146 Part III: Hamming It Up
Joining an Emergency Organization
As I discuss at the beginning of Part II, the very first item in the list that
describes the basis and purpose of the Amateur Service is emergency com­
munications. As I write this (October 2003), other hams are putting their
skills to work helping fight the Southern California wildfires. Over the course
of this year, hams have been called to action as a consequence of severe
weather, fires, earthquakes, and even to assist with debris collection from the
breakup of the Space Shuttle, Columbia. You never know when an emergency
will arise, so start preparing yourself as soon as you’re licensed.
Known in the radio biz as emcomm, emergency communications is loosely
defined as any communication with the purpose of reducing an immediate
threat of injury or property damage. This definition covers everything from
reporting car accidents to supporting large-scale disaster relief. In this sec­
tion, I introduce you to the elements of emcomm and show you where to find
the necessary information to get started.
Regardless of whether your interest in emcomm is to support you and your
family or to participate in organized emcomm, you need to know how ama­
teurs are organized. Otherwise, how do you know where to tune or how to
interact with them? That’s where the ARRL’s Field Organization comes in.
While other local and regional amateur emcomm organizations are certainly
active, the Field Organization’s Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) is
the largest nationwide ham radio emcomm organization. Like the rest of the
ARRL membership, ARES is organized by individual ARRL sections that may
be an entire state or as small as a few counties, depending on population. For
complete information about the ARES, find the Public Service Communications
Manual online at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/pscm.
The ARES and Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES), organized
and managed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), are
national emergency communications organizations that provide communica­
tions assistance to public and private agencies during a civil emergency or
disaster. They’re open to any amateur and welcome your participation.
If you want to help administer and manage emcomm activities in your ARRL
section after you have some ham radio experience, consider applying for an
ARRL Field Organization appointment. Volunteers fulfill the following positions:
 Assistant Section Manager (ASM): Section managers are appointed, but
you can always assist him or her. Tasks vary according to the activities
of the section, but collecting and analyzing volunteer reports or working
with and checking into local and regional nets are typical duties. Should
a special task arise, you may be asked to take it on behalf of the Section
Manager.

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
 Official Emergency Stations (OES): Perform specific actions as required
by your local Emergency Coordinators. OES appointments are for stations
committed to emcomm work and provide the opportunity to tackle
detailed projects in operations, administration, or logistics.
 Public Information Officer (PIO): You can establish relationships with
local and regional media in order to publicize ham radio, particularly
the public service and emcomm performed on behalf of the public. PIOs
also help establish good relationships with community leaders and
organizations.
 Official Observer (OO): OOs help other hams avoid receiving an FCC
notice of rule violation because of operating or technical irregularities.
They also keep an ear out for unlicensed intruders or spurious transmis­
sions from other services.
 Technical Specialist (TS): If you have expertise in a specific area or if
you are generally skilled in some aspect of radio operations, you can be
a Technical Specialist. The TS serves as a consultant to local and regional
hams, as well as to the ARRL.
Check out the other interesting appointments at both the section and divi­
sion level at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/org.

ARES and RACES
Why have two different organizations? Aren’t they doing the same thing? Yes
and no. The different levels of emergencies and disasters, with varying degrees
of resource requirements, require different responses by government agencies.
As a result, a single, one-size-fits-all amateur emergency organization is not
enough to handle all emergencies.
The Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) is managed by the ARRL Field
Organization and works primarily with local public safety and non-governmental
agencies, such as the Red Cross. Local ARES leadership determines how best
to organize the volunteers and interact with the agencies they serve. Training
is arranged by the ARES teams and local organizations.
You can register as an ARES volunteer by simply filling out an ARRL form (www.
arrl.org/FandES/field/forms/fsd98.pdf) and mailing it to the ARRL.
However, you also need to join a local ARES team to actually participate in
training and exercises. The easiest way to find out about the ARES organization
in your area is to contact your ARRL Division’s Section Manager (SM) listed
at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/org/smlist.html. You can also search
the ARRL Net Web site at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/nets/client/
netsearch.html and find ARES nets in your area. Check in to the net as a
visitor and ask for information about ARES in your area.

147

148 Part III: Hamming It Up
Military Affiliate Radio Services (MARS)
A third organization that maintains an extensive
emergency communications network of ham
volunteers is Military Affiliate Radio Services
(MARS), which provides an interface between
the worldwide military communications sys­
tems and ham radio. MARS is sponsored by the
Department of Defense, but each branch of the
military has its own MARS program.
MARS members receive special licenses and
call signs that allow them to operate on certain
MARS frequencies just outside the ham bands.
MARS provides technical and operations train­
ing, as well as preparation for emergency com­
munications. MARS volunteers handle many
personal messages from military personnel and

provide phone patches, or connections between
radios and the phone system, to their families
while they are deployed away from home.
To be a MARS volunteer, you must be at least 18
years old, be a U.S. citizen, and hold a valid
amateur license. For more information on each
of the MARS programs, including information
about how to apply for membership, see the fol­
lowing Web sites:
 Army: www.asc.army.mil/mars
 Navy/Marines: www.navymars.org
 Air Force: afmars.tripod.com/mars1.
htm

The Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES), founded as a Civil Defense
support organization, is sponsored by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and is governed by special FCC rules. RACES is organized
and managed by a local, county, or state civil defense agency responsible for
disaster services and activated during civil emergencies by state or federal
officials. RACES members are also required to be members of the local civilpreparedness group and receive training to support that group. More infor­
mation on RACES is available at www.races.net.
To join RACES or find out more about RACES in your area, search your state
government’s Web site for Auxiliary Communications Service, also known as
ACS. The local ACS coordinator is the person you need to contact about
RACES membership. If you can’t locate this information on your state’s Web
site, a different government agency may manage it. Enter your state’s name
along with Auxiliary Communications Service into a Web search engine and
look for links that lead to emergency management sites.
I recommend that you start by participating in ARES. If you like being an ARES
member, then dual membership in both ARES and RACES may be for you.

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent

Preparing for an Emergency
Getting acquainted with emergency organizations is fine, but it’s only a start.
You need to take the necessary steps to prepare yourself so that when the
time comes, you are ready to contribute. There are four parts to being pre­
pared. You must know who, where, what, and how.

Knowing who
I discuss in the previous section the organizations that perform emergency
communications. After you become familiar with the leadership in your ARRL
section, you also need to get acquainted with the local team leaders and mem­
bers. The call signs of the local clubs and stations operating from governmen­
tal Emergency Operations Centers (EOC) are valuable to have at your fingertips
in times of emergencies.
The best way to make these call signs familiar to you (and yours to them) is to
become a regular participant in nets and exercises. Checking into weekly nets
takes little time and reinforces your awareness of who else in your area is par­
ticipating. If you have the time, attending meetings and other functions such
as EOC open houses or work parties also helps put a face with the call signs.
Building personal relationships pays off when a real emergency comes along.

Knowing where
When an emergency occurs, you don’t want to be left tuning around the bands
trying to find out where emcomm is going on! Keep a detailed reference that
lists the emergency net frequencies along with the names of the leaders in your
area (I provide a chart for you to fill in on the Cheat Sheet). You may even wish
to reduce this list with a photocopier and laminate it for a long-lasting reference
the size of a credit card that you can carry in your wallet or purse.

Knowing what
You don’t want to be running around trying to get your gear together in an
emergency. If an emergency occurs and your equipment is not ready, you can
be under tremendous pressure. In your haste, you either omit some crucial
item or can’t find it on the spur of the moment. I recommend a Go Kit (similar
to a first aid kit) as an antidote to this adrenaline-induced confusion.

149

150 Part III: Hamming It Up
Before making up your Go Kit, consider what mission or missions you may
be attempting. A personal checklist is a good starting point for your plans. A
good generic checklist is available in the ARES Field Resources Manual, which
you can download at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/aresman.pdf. Figure 10-1
shows an example of a portable Go Kit.

Figure 10-1:
A Go Kit.

A Go Kit is a group of items necessary to you in an emergency that you col­
lect in advance of any such emergency and place in a handy carrying case. If
an emergency situation actually arises, the Go Kit allows you to spend your
time actually responding to the emergency instead of wracking your brain
trying to get your things together on the spur of the moment. By preparing
the kit in advance, you are less likely to forget important elements.
What should you put in your Go Kit? Well, of course, answers vary from ham
to ham, but your Go Kit should at least contain the following essentials:
 Food, particularly the kind not requiring refrigeration: You never know
when your next meal will arrive in an emergency. Remove the uncertainty
and bring along your own.
 Clothing appropriate to the emergency you’re responding to: If you get
too cold, you want a jacket nearby; too hot and you can exchange your
current clothing for something lighter. Preparation allows flexibility.

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
 Radios and equipment: Don’t forget to bring everything you may need:
radios, antennas, and power supplies. Make sure they’re lightweight,
flexible, and easy to set up.
 References: You need lists of operating frequencies as well as phone
lists — a personal phone list and a list of emergency-related telephone
numbers.
If you operate from home, no Go Kit is required, but you still need to prepare
for emergencies — such as if the lights go out for an extended period or your
main antenna goes down.
Your primary concern at home is emergency power. Most modern radios are
not very battery friendly, drawing more than an amp even when just receiv­
ing. You need a generator to power them for any period of time. If you have a
home generator, make sure it can be connected to power the AC circuits in
your radio shack.
If you don’t have a generator, you may be able to use another backup power
source: Most radios with a DC power supply can run from an automobile.
However, getting power from your car to your radio is not always easy. Decide
which radios you want to operate from your car and investigate how you can
power and connect an antenna to each of them.
Overall, the most important step is to simply consider and attempt to imple­
ment the answer to the question: “How would I get on the air if I’m unable to
use my regular shack?” Just by thinking things through and making plans,
you’re on the road to being prepared in an emergency.

Knowing how
Knowing the procedures to take is the most important part of personal pre­
paredness. No matter what your experience and background, the specifics of
working with your emergency organizations must be personally learned. If
they are not, you won’t be prepared to contribute when you show up on the
air from home or at a disaster site.
Do everyone a favor, including yourself, by spending a little time getting
trained in the necessary procedure and techniques. Your local emcomm
organization has plenty of training opportunities. You can check into the
local NTS and emcomm nets for practice. Participating in public service
activities, such as acting as a race course checkpoint in a fun run or as a
parade coordinator, is awfully good practice and exercises your radio
equipment, as well. By the way, you make good friends at these exercises
who can teach you a lot!

151

152 Part III: Hamming It Up
The ARRL has also created a series of Emergency Communications training
courses that you can take online. The courses require a tuition fee, but as of
October 2003, because of government and private grants, students who com­
plete the course successfully are also reimbursed for their tuition 100 percent.
Check out the courses at www.arrl.org/cce.
After you start in emergency communications training, you will find that
training is available for many other useful skills you can learn: CPR, first aid,
orienteering, and search and rescue are just a few activities with active ama­
teur involvement.

Operating in an Emergency
You hope it never happens, but what if worse comes to worst? All emergen­
cies are different, of course, so a step-by-step procedure is not going to be
very useful. Here are some solid principles to follow instead, based on the
ARES Field Resources Manual.
When disaster strikes, do the following:
1. Check that you and your family and your property are safe and
secure before you respond as an emcomm volunteer.
2. Monitor your primary emergency frequencies.
3. Follow the instructions you receive from the net control or other
emergency official on the frequency.
Check in if and when check-ins are requested.
4. Contact your local emergency communications leader or designee for
further instructions.
Everyone is likely to be fairly excited and tense. Keep your head on straight
and follow your training so that you can help rather than hinder in an emer­
gency situation.

Reporting an accident or other incident
Reporting an accident is more common than you may think. Anybody who
spends time driving can attest to the frequency of accidents. I personally
use ham radio to report accidents, stalled cars, and fires. Don’t assume that
people with cellphones are doing it. Know how to report an incident quickly
and clearly.

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
When you have an emergency situation to report, follow these steps if your
radio has an autopatch:
1. Turn up your radio’s power to the limit and clearly say, “Break” or
“Break Emergency” at the first opportunity.
If one station is weak, a stronger signal can get the attention of listening
stations. Don’t shy away from interrupting an ongoing conversation.
2. After you have control of the repeater or the frequency is clear, state
that you have an emergency to report.
3. State clearly that you are making an emergency autopatch and then
activate the autopatch system.
If you can not activate the repeater’s autopatch, you may ask another
repeater user to activate it for you. Or, on HF or VHF, you can ask for some­
one to make an emergency relay to 911. In this case, report all the neces­
sary material and then stand by on frequency until the relaying station
reports to you that the information is relayed and the call is complete.
See Chapter 9 to find out how to activate your radio’s autopatch feature.
4. Dial 911 and when the operator responds, state your name and that
you are reporting an emergency via amateur radio.
5. Follow the directions of the operator from there.
If the operator asks you to stay on the line, do so and ask the other
repeater users to please stand by.
6. When the operator finishes, release the autopatch and announce that
you released the autopatch.
Whether you use a repeater’s autopatch feature or relay the report by another
repeater user, you need to be able to generate clear, concise information. To
report an automobile accident, for example, you should know:
 The highway number or street
 The address or approximate mile marker of the highway
 The direction or lanes the accident occurred
 Whether the accident is blocking traffic
 If injuries are apparent
 If the vehicles are on fire, are smoking, or have spilled fuel
Similarly for fires and other hazards, the dispatcher wants to know where it is
and how serious it appears. Don’t guess if you don’t know for sure! Report
what you know, but don’t embellish the facts.

153

154 Part III: Hamming It Up
Making and responding to distress calls
Before an emergency occurs, be sure you know how to make a distress call
on a frequency where hams are likely to be listening, such as a marine ser­
vice net or a wide-coverage repeater frequency. Store at least one of these fre­
quencies in your radio’s memories, if possible. Anyone, licensed or not, can
use your radio equipment in an emergency to call for help on any frequency.
You won’t have time to be looking at net directories in an emergency. Do the
following things when you make a distress call.
 If you need immediate emergency assistance, the appropriate voice
signal is MAYDAY and the appropriate Morse code signal is SOS (yes,
just like in the movies).
Maydays sound something like: “MAYDAY, MAYDAY, MAYDAY, this is
NØAX,” followed by:
• Your location (latitude/longitude) or address of the emergency
• The nature of the emergency
• What type of assistance you need — such as medical or trans­
portation aid
 Repeat your distress signal and your call sign for several minutes or
until you get an answer. Even if you don’t hear an answer, others may
hear you.
 Try different frequencies if you do not get an answer. If you do decide
to change frequencies, announce to what frequency you are moving so
that anyone hearing you can follow.
If you hear a distress signal on the air:
 Immediately find something to record information. Note the time and
frequency of the call. To help the authorities render assistance as quickly
as possible, note the following information:
• The location (latitude/longitude) or address of the emergency
• The nature of the problem
• What type of assistance he or she needs — such as medical or
transportation aid
• Any other information that is helpful
 Respond to the call. Say “[Give the station’s call sign], this is [your call
sign]. I hear your distress call. What is your situation?”

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
Using Morse code, you send “[station’s call sign] DE [your call] RRR WAT
UR INFO?” or something similar. Let the station in distress know who
you are and that you hear them.
 After you acquire the information, ask the station in distress to remain
on frequency.
 Call the appropriate public agency or public emergency number, such
as 911. Explain that you are an amateur radio operator and that you
received a distress call.
The dispatcher either begins a process of asking you for information or
transfers you to a more appropriate agency.
Follow the dispatcher’s instructions to the letter. The dispatcher may
ask you to act as a relay to the station in distress.
 As soon as possible, report back to the station in distress. Tell them
who you contacted and any information you have been asked to relay.
 Stay on frequency as long as the station in distress or the authorities
need your assistance.

Supporting emergency communications
outside your area
What do you do in case of a disaster or emergency situation outside of your
immediate vicinity? How can you be of assistance? The best thing you can do
is make yourself available to the on-site communications workers, but only if
called upon to do so. Because most of the important information from a dis­
aster flows out, not in, you don’t want to get in the way.
For example, if a hurricane is bearing down on Miami, getting on the air and
calling, “CQ Miami!” is foolish. The chance you have of actually rendering assis­
tance are minimal and you stand a chance of diverting some actual emergency
need from the proper authorities. Instead, support the communications net­
works that the Miami hams depend on. Check in to your NTS local nets to see if
any messages need relayed to your location. Monitor the Hurricane Watch Net
on 14.325 MHz and any Florida emergency net frequencies. Tune to the bands
that support propagation to Florida, in case someone is calling for help.
Here’s another example — say a search-and-rescue (SAR) operation in the
nearby foothills is taking place with nets on 2-meter repeaters and several sim­
plex frequencies coordinating the activities. Do you check into the SAR nets?
No! But you can monitor (listening without transmitting) their operation to
see if an opportunity arises for you to provide assistance, especially if you

155

156 Part III: Hamming It Up
have beam antennas that you can aim directly at the area. (See Chapter 13 for
more on antennas.) If you can set your radios to listen to the repeater input
frequencies as well as the outputs, you may hear a weak station unable to
activate the repeater. If you monitor the simplex frequencies, you may act as
a relay station. Two stations in hilly areas may be unable to communicate
directly but you can hear both and can relay communications. If such a situa­
tion occurs, you can break in and say, “This is [your call sign] and I can copy
both stations. Do you want me to relay?”
You need to help information flow out from the disaster site, not force more
in. Listen, listen, listen. That’s good advice most of the time.

Providing Public Service
In between emergencies, hams perform other valuable public service in many
ways. After you become associated with a local emergency communications
group, you can use your ham radio skills in many opportunities for the public’s
benefit.

Weather monitoring
One of the most widespread public service functions is that of the amateur
weather watcher. In many areas, particularly with frequent severe weather
conditions, nets devoted to reporting local weather conditions meet regu­
larly. Some nets meet once or twice every day and others only when there is
a threat of severe weather.
Many weather nets are associated with the NOAA SKYWARN program (www.
skywarn.org). Groups reporting weather conditions under the SKYWARN
program feed information to the National Weather Service (NWS), which uses
the reports in forecasting and severe weather management. In some areas, a
net control station may operate a station from the NWS itself. For information
on whether a SKYWARN net is active in your area, follow the Local Skywarn
Groups link on the SKYWARN home page or enter SKYWARN net into an
Internet search engine.
Other weather nets may operate on VHF/UHF repeaters or on 75-meter voice
nets. For example, the New England Weather Net meets on 3905 kHz every day
at 1030Z. Informal weather nets on local repeaters are common. Ask around
to see if one operates in your area. They are usually active at commuting
drive times.

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent

Parades and sporting events
Amateurs participate in parades and sporting events to provide the event man­
agers with timely information and coordination. In return, amateurs get good
training in communications procedures and operations that simulate real-life
emergencies. For example, you can think of a parade as similar to a slow-speed
evacuation. A lost-child booth at a parade is similar to a small search-andrescue operation. Helping keep track of race entrants in a marathon is good
practice for handling health-and-welfare messages.
A lead representative of the amateur group usually coordinates plans with
the event management. The group then deploys whatever the plan requires.
Depending on the size of the event, all communications may take place on
one simplex frequency or several may be required. Information may be
restricted to simple status or actual logistics information may be relayed.
Communications support includes a wide variety of needs.
Event managers typically work with a single club or emergency services group
that manages the ham radio side of things. If you want to participate in these
events, start by contacting your Section Manager. The SM directs you to one or
more individuals active in public service who can let you know about upcom­
ing events.
When you support an event, be sure to get the appropriate identification. Dress
similarly to the rest of the group and obtain any required insignia. Have a copy
of your amateur license and some photo ID. Make sure you take water and
some food with you in case you are stationed somewhere without support.
Don’t assume you’ll be out of the weather and protect yourself against the
elements. Have your identification permanently engraved or attached to your
radio equipment to protect against theft.

Operating on Nets
Nets are one of the oldest ham radio activities. The first net was probably
formed as soon as two hams were on the air! Nets are just regularly scheduled
on-the-air meetings of hams with common interests. Sometimes the interests
are strictly for pleasure, such as collecting things, playing radio chess, or pur­
suing the Worked All States awards. Other nets are more utilitarian, such as
those for traffic handling, emergency services, weather reporting, and so forth.
Nearly all nets have a similar basic structure. A Net Control Station (NCS) ini­
tiates the net operations, maintains order, directs the net activities, and then
terminates net operations in an orderly way. Stations wishing to participate

157

158 Part III: Hamming It Up
in the net check in at the direction of the NCS. A net manager defines net policy
and focus, and works with the NCS stations to keep the net meeting on a reg­
ular basis.
Information, such as a formal radiogram or just a verbal message, is exchanged
during a net either on frequency or off frequency. Nets primarily for discussion
of a common interest or for selling and trading equipment tend to keep all the
transmissions on one frequency so that everyone can hear them. This system
is quite inefficient for a traffic handling or emergency net, so the NCS sends
stations off frequency to exchange the information and then return to the net
frequency.
Here’s an example of an NCS directing an off-frequency message exchange
during an NTS traffic-handling net:
W2—-: I have one piece of traffic (a single message) for Baltimore. (W2—either received the message on another net or can be the originating
station.)
NCS: W2—- standby. K3—- can you take that traffic for Baltimore? (K3—registered earlier (checked in) with the NCS and reported his location as
somewhere near Baltimore.)
K3—-: I can take the Baltimore traffic. (K3—- accepts and delivers the mes­
sage to the addressee.)
NCS: W2—- and K3—- move 5 down and pass the traffic.
This transmission means W2—- and K3—- are to tune 5 kHz below the net fre­
quency, re-establish contact, and W2—- then transmits the message to K3—-.
When they are done, both return to the net frequency and report to the NCS.
K3—- may stay on frequency until the net finishes or may immediately leave
to deliver the message.
If you want to check in to a net, you register your call sign and location or
status with the NCS. Be sure you can hear the NCS clearly and that you can
understand his or her instructions. If you’re not a regular net member, wait
until the NCS calls for visitors. When you check in, give your call sign once,
phonetically if on phone. If the NCS doesn’t copy your call sign the first time,
repeat your call sign or the NCS requests a relay from one of the listening sta­
tions that may hear you.
You can check in with business (such as an announcement) or traffic (mes­
sages) for the net in a couple of ways — listen to the net to find out which is
the appropriate method. The most common method is to state when check­
ing in, “NØAX with one item for the net.” The NCS acknowledges your item and

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
you then wait for further instructions. Or you can just check in with your call
sign and when the NCS acknowledges you and asks if you have any business
for the net, reply, “One item.” Listen to other net members checking in and
when in Rome, check in as the Romans do.
If you want to contact one of the other stations checking in, you can either
declare this intention when checking in as if it were net business or you can
wait until the check-in process is complete and the NCS calls for net business.
Either way, the NCS asks the other station to acknowledge you and puts the
two of you together following net procedures.
Nets are run using many different methods. Some methods are very formal
and others are more like an extended round-table QSO. The key is to listen,
identify the NCS, and follow the directions. The behavior of other net mem­
bers is your guide.

Handling Traffic
The National Traffic System (NTS), managed by the ARRL Field Organization,
is the backbone of all amateur message handling in North America. The NTS
runs every day, during emergencies and normal times alike. Traffic handling,
while less popular an activity than in years past, builds skilled and accurate
operating techniques, making you ready for any emergency.

Is traffic handling still needed?
Does traffic handling sound sort of antique?
It should, being one of the oldest activities in ham
radio. Why, in this age of wireless LANs and
coast-to-coast links, does traffic handling
still exist? The main reason is that when all else
fails — and sophisticated communications sys­
tems such as cell phones and the Internet fail
quickly in a disaster or emergency — ham radio
traffic handlers fill the gap in an accurate and
accountable way until those faster systems are
brought back online. Under such circumstances,
large numbers of simple text messages must be

sent quickly and reliably. For example, health and
welfare messages stream in and out of the
afflicted areas until more sophisticated systems
are brought in or restored. Even when digital
means of transmission are available, the same
type of message structure is often employed
to make the process accountable and traceable
as good emergency management requires.
Remember: Traffic handling is supposed to work
in an emergency, when the chips are down and
only the barest minimum of resources may exist.

159

160 Part III: Hamming It Up
Traffic consists primarily of text messages in the form of radiograms that are
very similar to old-style telegrams. Each message is relayed from ham to ham
using time-tested procedures until the message reaches its destination where
it’s delivered by an appropriate method. For detailed information on traffic
handling, the ARRL Operating Manual has an extensive chapter on handling
traffic procedures and jargon.
Figure 10-2 shows how messages entering the NTS start with nets at the local
level and are then passed up to section, regional, and area nets. Wide-area nets
connect the various regions as the messages move closer to their destinations.
Moving back down the tree, the messages are delivered to section nets and
finally, local nets. These NTS nets are managed by a Section Traffic Manager
(STM) who is part of the ARRL Field Organization.

Message
Area Nets
origin

Area Nets

Wide Area
Nets

Region Nets

Region Nets
Message

Figure 10-2:
The National
Traffic
System
organization.

Section Nets

Local Nets

destination

Section Nets

Message

Local Nets

Handling traffic is an excellent way for young hams to gain experience and
take on responsibility. You don’t have to be a certain age, only have a desire
to perform well and pay attention to detail and procedure. You can partici­
pate no matter where you live and whether you have just an hour or two a
week or can check in twice a day. The more volunteers available, the better
the chances of being able to support emergency operations.
Visual or physical handicaps are no obstacle either. When I was active in
Missouri nets, blind ham Ruth KØONK was the top traffic handler in the state
month after month with hundreds of messages to her credit.
If you develop a taste for traffic handling, you can request that your Section
Manager appoint you as an Official Relay Station (ORS). The ORS appoint­
ment signifies that you’re developing your skills in traffic handling and can

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
use them to support your community in an emergency. You may choose to
specialize in traffic handling on one mode, become a net manager, or act as a
liaison between regions.

Getting started
If you decide to give traffic handling a try, your best bet is to find an NTS
local net in your area. Go to the ARRL Net Search Web page (www.arrl.org/
FandES/field/nets/client/netsearch.html), select the Local Nets radio
button, your state from the U.S. State drop-down list, and the National Traffic
Forwarding Nets Only option from the National Traffic Affiliated drop-down list.
You get a list of local nets in your state that handle traffic. Click the net name to
find out more about the net.
On this Web site, you can also find a number of training nets using both voice
and Morse code. Follow the same search process, but select the State Nets
radio button, select your state from the list, and enter Training in the Net
Name box. If you do not see any training nets for your state, search again with
the Net Name box blank and review the resulting list. If you are unsure of which
nets are suitable, click the link for the state emergency net and contact the net
manager listed there for advice. You can also contact your Section Manager —
follow the link for your section at www.arrl.org/sections/?sect=.
When you select a net, listen in for a session or two. Determine when they ask
for visitors and how member stations check in. After you understand the net
procedures, check in as a visitor and ask for an after-net contact with the NCS.
During that contact, you can ask for information about the net and whether
any net guidelines are available. Then start checking in on a regular basis.

Handling a piece of traffic
The magic day arrives and the NCS hooks you up with another station with a
radiogram for your town. Don’t be afraid to say, “This is my first message, please
take it slow.” An experienced traffic handler takes all the time you need to get
the job done right. To prepare for this day, download and review the radiogram
guidelines FSD-218 at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/forms (you need to
scroll down the page before you come across it).
If you have a pad of radiogram forms (shown in Figure 10-3), so much the
better, but they’re not required. The radiogram guidelines describe each bit
of information just as it comes in from the traffic system. All you have to do is
write down the information and follow the instructions.

161

162 Part III: Hamming It Up

Figure 10-3:
An ARRL
radiogram
form with a
sample
message.

A radiogram consists of these parts:
 Preamble: The first batch of information you receive, the preamble is
information about the message — not the message itself. It describes the
nature and origin of the message so that you can handle it and reply, in
case you need to do so. The preamble improves the message accuracy.
 Addressee: Along with the name, the addressee information usually has
a street address and a telephone number. Some messages only have a
name, town, and telephone number. You deliver the message by telephone
or whatever means are available.
 Text message: Radiograms are intended to be 25 words or less, so you
don’t have to deal with a lot of text. Be sure you have the spelling correct
on any unusual words. The only punctuation you’re likely to encounter is
an X in place of a period and a ? at the end of a question. Don’t be con­
fused by the check of the message, which is just a count of word groups,
number groups, and mixed groups (letter-number combinations, such as
a serial number) in the text portion only. The check is to allow you to
count through the text and verify that you received the right amount of
information. Don’t be afraid to ask the transmitting station if you’re not
sure about counting the text’s elements.
The text may include something like ARL FORTY SIX. This text refers
to ARRL Numbered Radiograms, which are special condensations of
common groups of words. ARL FORTY SIX (they’re always spelled out)

Chapter 10: Operating with Intent
means “Greetings on your birthday and best wishes for many more to
come.” These are quite a time saver! A complete list (FSD-3) is available
from the ARRL Field Organization Forms page (www.arrl.org/FandES/
field/forms).
 Signature: The name or identification of the message’s originator.
Take your time and carefully check the entire message to be sure you copied
it correctly. Check with the transmitting station if you have any questions.
When you’re sure, you can say, “QSL!” (meaning “received completely” with
pride and report back to the NCS.

Delivering the message
Delivering a message is a pretty easy part of traffic handling. All you have to
do is call the addressee and say, “Hello, my name is —-, I’m an amateur radio
operator and I have a message for you from —-.” You need to let them know
you’re not a telemarketer and that you have a message from someone they
are likely to know.
After your addressee is ready to receive the message, carefully read it back to
him or her (just the text, not the preamble or addressee). Convert any num­
bered radiogram to its equivalent text — even if you’re delivering the message
to another ham. When you’re done, be sure everything is okay and ask if he
or she has a reply.
If so, be sure to get the complete addressee information (be sure of the spelling)
and try to limit the response to 25 words or less. You can use the numbered
radiograms to save space, too. Note the local time and date when you accept
the message. Assign it a precedence, add any handling instructions (which
are optional), and count up the words.
After you write the message, take it back to the next net session and when
you check in, say “[your call] with one message!”

Sending a message
When you get back to the net and the NCS assigns you to a station that accepts
your traffic, ask for help in determining the message’s check, or word count (if
you need help). Tell the station the check you came up with and ask him or her
to help you confirm it. Before the message goes on its way, the check needs to
be correct or subsequent relaying stations will think an error is in the message
and it may come back to you.

163

164 Part III: Hamming It Up
With the complete message ready to go, slowly read each portion of informa­
tion to the relaying station using the following steps:
1. Start with the preamble and then say, “Break for addressee.”
The relaying station either says “Go ahead” or asks for clarification
about some item in the preamble.
2. Read the addressee information and say, “Break for text.”
3. Read the text and signature and say, “End of Message.”
If the relaying station didn’t get the message all correct, he or she lets
you know and asks for a fill or repeat. For example, they may say, “All
after feldspar,” which means “Repeat everything after the word feldspar.”
Soon, the relaying station reports “QSL!” and you’ve done it!

Chapter 11

Specialties
In This Chapter
 Contacting distant stations
 Participating in contests
 Pursuing awards
 Operating with low power
 Exploring the digital modes
 Using satellites
 Transmitting images

A

fter you get rolling with casual operating, you can begin to explore a
whole world of interesting specialties within ham radio. Specialties, to
many, are the real attraction of the hobby.

In this chapter, I give you an overview of the most popular activities, cover
some of the basic techniques and resources, and demystify a little bit of the
specialized jargon ham radio seems to attract. I don’t hit all of the possible
activities by any means, but start with the activities I discuss in this chapter
and you’ll discover many others along the way, especially if you read the
magazines and browse the popular Web sites.

DX-ing
Right after traffic handling (Chapter 10), pushing your station to make con­
tacts over greater and greater distances (DX means distant stations) is the
second oldest activity in all of ham radio. Somewhere out in the ether, a sta­
tion is always just tantalizingly out of reach and the challenge of contacting
that station is the purpose of DX-ing.

166 Part III: Hamming It Up
Thousands of hams across the continents and around the world like nothing
better than to make contacts (QSOs) with someone far away. These hams
seem to ignore all nearby stations. Their logs are filled with exotic locations.
Ask them about some odd bit of geography and you are likely to find that
they not only know where it is, but some of its political history and the call
sign of at least one ham operator there. These hams are DXers.
The history of ham radio is tightly coupled to DX-ing. As transmitters became
more powerful and receivers more sensitive, the distances a station could
make contact were a direct measure of quality. Hams quickly explored the dif­
ferent bands and follow the fluctuations of the ionosphere. DX-ing drives
improvements in many types of equipment.
Today, intercontinental contacts on the HF frequencies traditionally consid­
ered to be the shortwave bands are common but still thrilling. Cross-continental contacts on VHF and UHF once thought impossible are made in
increasing numbers. Because the sun and the seasons are always changing,
each day you spend DX-ing is a little (and sometimes a lot) different. Sure,
you can log on to an Internet chat room or send e-mail around the world, but,
like fishing, logging a QSO in the log, mastering the vagaries of the ionos­
phere, and getting through to a distant station is a real accomplishment nonhams can never know.

DX-ing on the shortwave bands
The following sections show you how to use the shortwave or HF bands to
“work DX.” These are the bands with frequencies below 30 MHz on which sig­
nals routinely travel all over the Earth, bouncing between the ionosphere and
the Earth’s surface as they go. The ease with which signals can be exchanged
between continents on the shortwave bands attracts many thousands of
adherents. Because the signals propagate so widely, HF DX-ing is often a
worldwide event with stations calling from several continents. VHF and UHF
DX-ing is no less exciting, but requires a different approach, which is covered
later. Propagation is much more selective, so fewer signals are heard at one
time and are usually from stations concentrated in a few areas. These differ­
ences make what is fundamentally the same pursuit — making contact as far
away as you can — quite different on the shortwave bands versus VHF
and UHF.
For more information on propagation I recommend checking out the technical
information available on the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site to find out how
the ionosphere affects long-haul contacts for HF, VHF, and UHF signals. In-depth
reading about shortwave DX-ing techniques can be found in The Complete DXer
by Bob Locher W9KNI (published by Idiom Press). Now in its third edition,
Bob’s book has Elmered legions of beginning DXers.

Chapter 11: Specialties

Tuning for DX
Before starting out, you need to know that even if you have a very modest
home or mobile HF station, you can work DX. Skill and knowledge compensate
for a great deal of disparity in equipment. Nowhere is this concept more true
than in hunting the elusive DX. The first skill to learn is not how to transmit,
but how to listen.
When working DX, in all cases, start at the bottom of the band or as close as
your license privileges permit. As I discuss in Chapter 9, the best DX tends to
collect there. Stop at each signal along the way, even those that sound like
casual contacts, to determine who is on the air. Listen for obvious accents
and signals with a curious, hollow, or fluttery sound.
Signals coming from far away have to make several hops off the ionosphere —
sometimes as many as five or six! — to get to your antenna. These hops divide
the signal into multiple paths that have slightly different travel times. The
paths interfere with each other as they arrive at your antenna, smearing the
signal out in time and making its strength change rapidly. Learn to recognize
that sound because, for sure, it means DX is at hand!
Check the frequencies frequented by DX-peditions — trips lasting a few days
to exotic and desirable locations made specifically to activate (make contacts
from) them for DXers around the world. You can usually find these adventur­
ers on frequencies in the lower 25 kHz of the CW bands (the Extra Class seg­
ments) and at the high end of the Extra Class segments on phone. Common
frequencies include 3.795, 14.195, 21.295, and 28.495 MHz.
Program the popular DX frequencies into your rig’s memory for easy access.
Keep tuning and listening, noting what you hear and at what times. When DX­
ing, experience with the characteristics of a band’s propagation is the best
teacher. Try to detect a pattern when signals from the different population
centers appear and how the seasons affect propagation on the different bands.
Soon you recognize the signals of regulars on the band, too. As usual, the key
is to listen, listen, listen.
If you plan on doing a lot of DX-ing, purchase a copy of the ARRL DXCC List
(www.arrl.org/awards/dxcc) and a ham radio prefix map of the world for ref­
erence. These tools help you figure out what country corresponds to the call
signs you hear. You sometimes hear special or unusual call signs. With an ITU
prefix list, you can figure out those call signs’ countries of origin. A very detailed
prefix-country list is available online at www.ac6v.com/prefixes.htm#PRI.
While you’re collecting resources, here’s another suggestion: Centered on your
location, an azimuthal-equidistant or az-eq map, such as the one in Figure 11-1,

167

168 Part III: Hamming It Up
tells you what direction a signal’s coming from. Because signals travel along
the “Great Circle” paths between stations (imagine a string stretched tightly
over a globe between the stations), the path for any signal that you hear is
along the radial line from the middle of the map (your location) directly to the
other station. If the path goes the “long way around,” it goes off the edge of the
map (which is halfway around the world from your station) and reappears on
the other side. This is the “long path.” Most signal paths stay entirely on the
map because they take the “short path.” Some az-eq maps are available in the
ARRL Operating Manual and you can also generate one online from several
sources, including www.wm7d.net/azproj.shtml.

Daytime DX-ing
You must account for the fluctuations in the ionosphere when you’re DX-ing.
Depending on the hour, the ionosphere either absorbs a signal or reflects it over
the horizon. In the daytime, the 20, 17, 15, 12, and 10-meter bands, called the
High Bands, tend to be “open” (support propagation) to DX stations. Before day­
light, signals begin to appear from the east, beginning with 20-meters and pro­
gressing to the higher bands over a few hours. After sunset, the signals linger
from the south and west for several hours with the highest frequency bands
closing first in reverse order. Daytime DXers tend to follow the Maximum Use­
able Frequency (MUF), the highest signal the ionosphere reflects. These reflec­
tions are at a very low angle and so can travel the longest distance for a single
reflection (one reflection is called a hop) and have the highest signal strengths.

Figure 11-1:
An
azimuthalequidistant
map
centered
on the
Midwest
United
States.

Chapter 11: Specialties
Nighttime DX-ing
From 30-meters down in frequency are the nighttime bands of 30, 40, 60, 80,
and 160-meters, known as the Low Bands. These bands are throttled during the
daytime hours by absorption in the lower layers of the ionosphere. After the
sun begins to set, these bands start to come alive. First, 30, 40, and 60-meters
may open in late afternoon and stay open somewhat after sunrise. 80 and 160­
meters, however, make fairly rapid transitions around dawn and dusk. Signals
between stations operating on 80 and 160-meters often exhibit a short (15 to 30
minute) peak in signal strength when the easternmost stations are close to sun­
rise. This is known as the dawn enhancement. This time is good for stations
with modest equipment to be on the air and take advantage of the stronger sig­
nals on these more difficult DX bands.
160-meters is known as Top Band because it has the longest wavelength of
any current amateur band. This long wavelength requires larger antennas.
Add in more atmospheric noise than at higher frequencies and you have a
challenging situation. That’s why some of the most experienced DXers love
Top Band DX-ing. Imagine trying to receive a 1 kilowatt broadcast station
halfway around the world. That’s what the Top Band DXer is after! As difficult
as this task sounds, many of the top DXers have managed it.

Contacting a DX station
Making a call to a DX station requires a little more attention to the clarity of
your speech and sending than making a call to a nearby ham. Remember:
Your signal likely has the same qualities as the DX station — hollow or flut­
tery and weak — so speak and send extra carefully. Give the DX station’s call
sign using the same phonetics they are using and then repeat yours at least
twice, using standard phonetics. On Morse code contacts, send the DX station’s call sign once and your call sign two or three times at a speed matching
that of the DX station.
DX contacts, except when signals are quite strong, tend to be shorter than
contacts with nearby stations. When signals are very weak or a station very
rare, a contact may consist of nothing more than a confirmation that you
each have the call signs correct and a signal report as described in Chapter 8.
To confirm the contact, both you and the DX station must get each other’s
call signs correct. To do that, use standard phonetics (on voice transmissions),
speak clearly, and enunciate each word. New hams often don’t realize that
multiple hops and skips around the world have a pretty dramatic effect on
speech intelligibility, none of it for the better. Speak relatively slowly, don’t
slur your words or mumble, and keep your transmissions short.
When it’s time to conclude the contact, you need to let the other station know
if you will be sending a QSL card (these cards are commonly known as QSLs)
to confirm that the contact occurred. Collecting these cards, like those in
Figure 11-2, is a wonderful part of the hobby. See Chapter 14 for more info on
QSL cards.

169

170 Part III: Hamming It Up
Tracking the sun
Because the sun is so important in determining
what bands are open and in what direction, you
need to know what portions of the Earth are in
daylight and darkness. You can use a number of
tools to keep track of the sun. The very handy DX
Edge, once made by Xantek and currently only
available at hamfests and on the various usedequipment-for-sale Web sites, is a pocket-sized
world map with sliding overlays that show the

Figure 11-2:
DX QSL
cards from
New
Zealand,
Japan,
Pratas
Island, and
England.

light and dark areas of the Earth in different sea­
sons. Many DXers keep one at their elbow when
chasing DX. You can substitute the online gray
line map instead (found at dx.qsl.net/
propagation/greyline.html and shown
in the figure below). A useful standalone soft­
ware package that has many types and styles of
real-time world and regional maps is Geoclock
(home.att.net/~geoclock).

Chapter 11: Specialties
YOU DON’T NEED TO SHOUT INTO THE MICROPHONE! Shouting doesn’t
make you any louder at the other end! By adjusting your microphone gain
and speech processor, you can create a very understandable signal at normal
voice levels! Your contacts and family will thank you for doing so. Save the
shouting for celebrating your latest DX contact!
If you call and call and can’t get through or if the stations you contact ask for
a lot of repeats and fills (in other words, if they often ask you to repeat your­
self), you probably have poor audio quality. Have a nearby friend, such as a
club member, meet you on the air when the bands are quiet and do some
audio testing. Check to see if you have hum or noise on your audio. Noise is
often the result of a broken microphone cable connection, either in the
microphone itself or at the radio connector. You may not be able to tell you
have a problem from the radio’s power meter output, so an on-the-air check
is necessary to find it. Inexpensive, old, and non-communications micro­
phones (such as computer microphones) often have poor fidelity. If your onthe-air friend says you sound like a bus station PA system, upgrade to a
better microphone!

Pileups
Aptly named, a pileup is just that: a pile of many signals trying to get through
to a single — often quite rare — station. Pileups can sound like a real mess, but
if you listen carefully, you’ll notice that some stations get right through. How
do they do this? They listen to the rare station’s operating procedure, find what
kind of signals the operator is listening for, and carefully time their call. If they
don’t get through the first time, they stop calling and listen until they have it
figured out. These smooth operators use their ears instead of their lungs or
amplifiers to get through. You can, too, by listening first and transmitting
second. Here are some common tricks to listen for and try yourself:
 Time your call a little bit differently than everybody else. Wait for a
second or two before beginning or wait for the short lull when most
have given their call once and are listening.
 Make your signal sound a little bit differently, higher or lower by offset­
ting the transmit frequency 200 or 300 hertz.
 Just give your call once or twice before listening for the DX station.
Some folks never seem to stop calling — how would they know if the DX
station did answer them?
 Use phonetics similar to others that have gotten through.
Try to figure out what the DX station hears well and try to do that.

171

172 Part III: Hamming It Up
Splits
The term split is used when a station is transmitting on one frequency, but lis­
tening on another. This procedure is common when many stations are trying
to get through to a single station, such as a rare DX station. You can tell that a
station is working split when you hear the station contacting other stations
but you can’t hear those stations’ responses. It can also work the other way
around: Sometimes you tune in a pileup of stations trying to contact a DX sta­
tion — but you aren’t able to hear the DX station’s responses. Typically, the
DX station’s split listening frequency is a few kHz above the transmitting fre­
quency. The station being called gives instructions such as “listening up two”
or “QRZed 14205 to 14210.” The former means he’s listening for stations 2 kHz
above his transmit frequency. The latter means he’s listening in the range
between the two frequencies, in this case probably 14.205 to 14.210 kHz.
To “work split,” set one of your radio’s main tuning controls (called VFOs,
which is an abbreviation of variable frequency oscillator) to the transmit fre­
quency and the other to the receive frequency. These are usually referred to
as “VFO A” and “VFO B.” Set up the radio to listen where one VFO is set and
transmit on the other. Read your rig’s manual carefully so that you can do
this properly. If you accidentally transmit on the wrong VFO, you interfere
with the DX station. This method is the easiest way of working split, but it’s
not the only one: You can also establish the transmit and receive frequencies
as memory selections on your radio, and then jump between memories.
Don’t bother trying to dial back and forth — you won’t be quick enough. With
either method, practice for a while first, before trying it out on the air.

Using (and abusing) DX spotting systems
DXers share the frequencies and call signs of DX stations they discover on the
air through an extensive, worldwide system of VHF packet radio networks and
Web pages. This system is called spotting, and the message that describes
where you can find the DX station is called a spot. The following is an example
from the popular Web site www.dxsummit.com:
W5VX 7003.7 A61AJ 0142 05 Nov
This spot means that W5VX is hearing A61AJ from the United Arab Emirates
(A6 is the prefix of call signs for amateurs in the UAE) on a frequency of
7003.7 kHz at 0142Z (01:42 AM in London) on November 5th.
If you live in any populated area of North America or Europe, you probably can
access one of the VHF packet radio DX spotting systems. If you have Internet
access, you can also log on to the DX spotting system Web sites using a
browser or by using TELNET (a text-only Internet communications program
included with most computer operating systems) to log on to local “packet
clusters,” which are linked to the VHF packet systems. (See the section
“Packet,” later in this chapter, for more on packet systems.) Numerous DX
Web sites and clusters are listed at http://www.ac6v.com/dxlinks.htm.

Chapter 11: Specialties
Although jumping from spot to spot can be a lot of fun, maintaining your
tuning and listening skills is important. Be sure that you have the station’s
call sign correct before you put it in your log — contacting what you think is
a rare station, only to find out that due to a busted spot, your fabulous DX
contact wasn’t so fabulous after all, is a disappointment. Because spotted sta­
tions attract quite a crowd, working DX sometimes by not chasing the spot­
ted stations and tuning for them yourself may be easier. Don’t become
dependent on the spotting networks.

Getting awards
Many DX-ing award programs, and the most popular are listed in Table 11-1,
are suited to widely varying levels of interest. If you are just getting started,
the Worked All Continents (WAC) award is for you. What you need is a con­
tact with each of the six populated continents: Europe, Africa, Asia, North
and South America, and Oceania (islands in the South Pacific and Australia).
No matter where you live around the world, one continent remains aloof, tan­
talizing you until you break through and make the contact. The Worked All
States (WAS) program is popular both in and out of the Unites States and is a
great way to get used to hunting elusive contacts. My last state was Vermont.
What will yours be?

Table 11-1

Popular DX Award Programs

Sponsor

Award Program

Achievement

ARRL (www.arrl.

Worked All
Continents (WAC)

Make a contact in each of six
continents.

Worked All States
(WAS)

Make a contact in each of the 50
U.S. states.

DX Century Club
(DXCC)

Make a contact with 100 of the
DXCC entities (currently 337 coun­
tries, islands, and territories are on
the list).

Worked All Zones
(WAZ)

Contact all 40 of the world’s CQdefined zones, which are different
regions of the world, such as
Eastern Europe, Japan, and so on.

Worked Prefixes
(WPX)

Several types of awards for
contacts with different types of call
signs.

Islands on the Air
(IOTA)

Various levels of awards for
contacting saltwater islands
around the world.

org/awards)

CQ Magazine (www.
cq-amateurradio.com/
awards.html)

Radio Society of
Great Britain (RSGB)
(www.rsgb.org)

173

174 Part III: Hamming It Up
The other awards in Table 11-1 are more challenging. For example, DXCC —
the undisputed leader of DX award programs — is awarded when the appli­
cant has confirmed contacts with 100 entities (countries, colonies, islands)
around the world. Because the awards are challenging, their achievement
does signify a worthwhile accomplishment. As a result, making contacts in
pursuit of the awards is a very popular segment of ham radio.
Most DX awards programs reward achievement in the same manner: First,
you must qualify for the basic award (100 entities, 100 islands, 300 prefixes,
and so on). You receive a certificate and your first endorsement (a sticker or
other adornment that signifies a specific level of achievement). From that
point, you can receive additional endorsements for higher levels of achieve­
ment: more contacts on one band, more contacts in one geographic region,
and so on. Because these levels of success are so open-ended, you can
achieve them all. (For more on awards, see the section “Chasing Awards,”
later in this chapter.)

DX-ing on the VHF/UHF bands
Although DX-ing on the traditional shortwave bands is very popular, an
active and growing community enjoys DX-ing on the bands above 30 MHz.
The excitement of extending your station’s capability to these bands is being
shared by more hams than ever before. The explosion in popularity of
VHF/UHF DX-ing is similar to the explosion of HF DX enthusiasm in the 1960s
when top-quality equipment became available to the average ham. These
days, the recent generation of all-band HF/VHF/UHF radio equipment puts
top-notch DX-ing on the shack desktop.
With the exception of the 6-meters band — known as the Magic Band
because of its sudden and dramatic openings where distant stations sud­
denly “appear” — these higher frequencies usually do not support the kind of
long-distance, transoceanic contact common on HF because the ionosphere
cannot reflect those signals. VHF/UHF DXers look for contacts using different
methods of propagation.
VHF/UHF bands have unfairly gotten a reputation as being limited to line-ofsight contacts. This reputation is due to the limitations of previous genera­
tions of relatively-insensitive equipment and the prevalence of FM, which
takes considerably more signal strength to provide a signal quality equivalent
to SSB and Morse code transmissions. By taking advantage of well-known
modes of radio propagation, you can extend your VHF/UHF range dramati­
cally beyond the horizon.

Chapter 11: Specialties
Finding and working VHF/UHF DX
As on the HF bands, the DX is found at the very lowest frequencies on the band
in the so-called weak signal segments. For example, on the 6-meters band, 50.0
to 50.3 MHz — a 300 kHz segment as large as most HF bands — is where the
Morse code and single sideband calling frequencies are located. Similar seg­
ments exist on all VHF/UHF bands through the lower microwave frequencies.
When you’re DX-ing on VHF/UHF, stay close to these calling frequencies or set
your radio to scan across the lower end of the band and leave the radio on.
Propagation between widely separated points is often short-lived. If you wait
for somebody to call you or e-mail you with news about a DX station, you’re
probably going to miss the boat. Set your squelch control (squelch mutes the
receiver unless a signal exceeds a preset level) so that the radio is just barely
quieted. If anything shows up on frequency, the radio springs to life. This way,
you (and whoever else is in earshot) do not have to listen to receiver hiss and
random noise.
For this type of DX-ing, I recommend a small beam antenna. (Beam antennas
are discussed in Chapter 12.) These antennas are easy to build, being relatively
small compared to HF antennas, and are terrific home-brewing projects. Mount
the antenna for horizontal polarization with the antenna elements parallel to
the ground. You should be able to point the antennas in any horizontal direc­
tion, because signals may appear from nearly any direction at any time.

Sporadic-E
The term sporadic-E refers to an interesting property of one of the lower
ionospheric layers — the E-layer. Somewhere around 65 to 70 miles above the
Earth, illumination of the E-layer by the sun produces small highly-ionized
regions that are highly reflective to radio waves. So reflective, in fact, that
they can reflect 6-meter, 2-meter, 1.25-meter, and (rarely) 70-cm band signals
back to Earth. These regions don’t last more than an hour or two and drift
around over the Earth’s surface. While they’re there, though, hams can use
them as big radio reflectors. Their temporary nature has led to the name
sporadic-E for the propagation paths that use them.
Sporadic-E, or Es, propagation occurs all through the year, but is most common
in the early summer months and winter months. When Es are present, signals
appear to rise out of the noise over a few seconds as the ionized patch moves
into position between stations. The path may last for seconds or for an hour,
with signals typically very strong in both directions. Working Es with only a few
watts and very simple antennas is possible. Most VHF/UHF DXers get their
start working Es openings on 6-meters, and certainly more people are actively
DX-ing in that way than in any other.

175

176 Part III: Hamming It Up
Aurora
Along with sporadic-E clouds, you can find another large ionized structure in
the ionosphere — the aurora! The aurora is oriented vertically, instead of hori­
zontally like sporadic-E, but still reflects signals very well. When strong aurora
is present, VHF and UHF signals are reflected over a very wide area.
One of the neatest things about auroral propagation is the ability to add its
own audible signature to the signals it reflects! If you’ve ever seen the aurora,
you understand how dynamic it is, twisting and shimmering from moment to
moment. This movement is even more pronounced to radio waves. The result
is that signals reflected by an aurora have a characteristic rasp or buzz
impressed on the Morse tone or the spoken voice. Very strong aurora can
turn Morse transmissions into bursts of white noise and render voices unin­
telligible. Like seeing the aurora, after you hear the auroral signature, you’ll
never forget it!

Tropospheric
Also known as tropo, tropospheric propagation occurs in the atmospheric
layers closest to Earth’s surface, in an area known as the troposphere. Any kind
of large-scale abrupt change in the troposphere, such as temperature inver­
sions or weather fronts, can act as a conduit for VHF, UHF, and even microwave
signals over long distances. If your region has regular cold or warm fronts, you
can take advantage of them to reflect or convey your signals.
Tropospheric propagation supports surprisingly regular communications on
2- and 1.25-meters and between stations in California and stations on the
slopes of Hawaiian volcanoes. A stable temperature inversion layer forms
over the eastern Pacific most afternoons, so a properly located station on the
slope of a volcano at the right altitude can launch signals along the inversion.
As the inversion breaks up near land, the signals disperse and are received
by the mainland amateurs. When conditions are right, the mainlanders can
then send signals back along the same path, more than 2,500 miles!

Meteor scatter
The most fleeting reflectors of all result from the tens of thousands of mete­
ors that enter the Earth’s atmosphere each day. Traveling at thousands of
miles per hour, the friction as the meteors burn up ionizes the gas molecules
for several seconds. These ionized molecules also reflect radio signals, so
two lucky stations with the meteor trail between them can communicate for a
few seconds. The ionized trails reflect radio waves for shorter and shorter
durations as frequency increases. This makes the lowest frequency VHF
band, 6-meters (50 MHz), the “easiest” band for beginners to make contacts
using meteor scatter.

Chapter 11: Specialties
Stations that attempt to make contact in this way are called ping jockeys,
because the radio waves bouncing of the trail have a characteristic ping
sound. As you may imagine, ping jockeys go into high gear around the times
of meteor showers, large and small. Because of meteor scatter, hams can
enjoy meteor showers even during daylight hours!
In order to make contact during these few seconds, hams communicate very
quickly. Voice operators make very short transmissions of their call signs and
locations. Morse code operators send short bursts of high-speed code. Taking
advantage of the capabilities of a computer and sound card, an ultra highspeed Morse code program, HSMS (for High-Speed Meteor Scatter), automates
some of the more difficult aspects of this interesting mode.
For more information on meteor scatter, you can find several useful links, as
well as a bulletin board for meteor scatter propagation, at dxworld.com/
hsms.html.

Mountaintopping
What happens when all of the popular DX-ing methods fail to provide you
with an over-the-horizon path? Well, then, move your horizon! Because
VHF/UHF radios are light and antennas small, you can drive, pack, or carry
your gear to the tops of buildings, hills, ridges, fire lookouts, and yes, even
mountaintops.
The higher the elevation of your station, the farther your signal travels with­
out any assistance from the ionosphere, weather, or interplanetary travelers.
Camping, hiking, and driving expeditions can take on a ham radio aspect,
even if you’re just taking a hand-held radio. From the tops of many hills, you
can see for many tens of miles and a radio can see even better than you!
These expeditions are particularly popular in VHF contests, discussed in the
section “Taking Part in Radio Contests,” later in this chapter. All you have to
do is pick up a book of topographic maps of your state, load up the car with
your radio gear, and head out!

VHF propagation resources
To use the types of propagation modes I describe in this chapter effectively,
you can benefit greatly from the experiences of others. Many clubs specialize
in VHF and UHF operation and can be of great assistance to you. Use the
resources I discuss in Chapter 3 to find these clubs.
When the bands open up or an unusual propagation event occurs, getting the
word out as widely and as quickly as possible is to everyone’s benefit. Sounds
like a job for the Internet, doesn’t it? A strong community of VHF/UHF DXers is
in nearly constant communication worldwide, thanks to the Internet. My per­
sonal favorite is the set of propagation bulletin boards at dxworld.com. You

177

178 Part III: Hamming It Up
can find message posting pages for all of the VHF and UHF bands, specialty
pages for meteor scatter and other activities, plus links on each page to useful
resources for that topic.

VHF DX awards
Because VHF DX contacts are generally not as distant or worldwide as their
shortwave cousins, the VHF DX awards deal with geographic divisions on a
smaller scale — grid squares. Grid squares are the basis for the Maidenhead
Locator System, in which one grid square measures 1° latitude by 2° longi­
tude. Each grid square is labeled by two letters (called the field) and two
numbers (called the square). For example, my location near Seattle is in the
CN87 grid square. Grid squares are divided even further into subsquares,
which are denoted by two additional letters. My six-character grid square is
CN87sk. (The subsquare is generally noted with lowercase letters.)
In North America, where the countries tend to be very large (except in the
Caribbean), the primary VHF/UHF award program is the ARRL’s VHF/UHF
Century Club (VUCC). (Check the program out at www.arrl.org/awards/
vucc.) The number of grid squares you need to contact to qualify for VUCC
varies with the band, due to the degree of difficulty. As an example, on the
lowest two bands (6-meters and 2-meters) and for contacts made using satel­
lites, contacts on 100-grid squares are required. Along with VUCC, the ARRL’s
Worked All States (WAS) program has a vigorous VHF/UHF audience, as well.
(For more on WAS, see the section “Getting awards,” earlier in this chapter.)
In Europe, where more countries are within range of conventional VHF/UHF
propagation, many of the shortwave DX awards have a VHF/UHF counterpart.
Many VHF/UHF awards are based on contacting different countries, too.
What would DX-ing be without a distance record, too? On shortwave bands,
with signals bouncing all the way around the world, the maximum terrestrial
distance records were met long ago. In VHF/UHF, though, a lot of frontiers are
still left. Al Ward, W5LUA, has put together a complete VHF/UHF/Microwave
record list, which is posted at www.arrl.org/qst/worldabove/dxrecords.
html. Check out the amazing list of propagation modes and distances. New
records are added all the time. Maybe your call sign will be there one day. (For
more on awards, see the section “Chasing Awards,” later in this chapter.)

Taking Part in Radio Contests
How can you have a contest on the radio? What kind of rules are there? Are
there referees? Awards? If you’ve never encountered a radio contest before,
the concept can seem pretty puzzling.

Chapter 11: Specialties
Radio contests, or radiosport, are competitions between stations to make as
many contacts as possible with as many different stations as possible within
the time period of the contest. Time periods range from a couple of hours to
a weekend. Restrictions say who can contact who and on what bands. With
each contact, you must exchange specific information. Often, themes dictate
which stations you are to contact, such as stations in different countries,
grids, or states.
After the contest is over, participants send their logs to the contest sponsor by
mail or, more commonly, by e-mail. The sponsor then performs the necessary
amount of cross-checking between logs to confirm that the claimed contacts
actually took place. The final score is computed and the results published in a
magazine or Web page with the winners receiving certificates, plaques, or
other non-monetary prizes.
What’s the point of such contests? Well, for one thing, they can be a lot of fun
as many stations are all on the air at once, trying for rapid-fire short contacts.
In the big international contests, such as CQ World-Wide, literally thousands of
stations are on the air at once on the bands from 160 through 10 meters from
locations spread out all over the world! In a few hours, you can find yourself
logging a WAC (Worked All Continents) and being well on your way to some of
the DX awards I cover in the previous sections. Contests are a great way to
make contacts for awards programs.
Contests are also a great way to exercise your station and operating ability to
the limits. Are you able to crack the contest pileups? Can you copy that weak
signal through the noise? Is your receiver up to the task of handling those
strong signals? If you want to increase your Morse code speed, spend some
time in a contest on the CW sub-bands. Just as with physical fitness, competi­
tive activities are fun and make staying in shape a lot more fun than solitary
calisthenics!

Types of contests
Contest styles run the gamut. Some contests are low-key, take-your-time
events taking place on a few frequencies here and there. Other contests fill a
band with hectic activity from all directions. I list some popular contests in
Table 11-2. Don’t worry if you don’t see a contest for your favorite band,
mode, or specialty — a contest exists for every taste. Use the contest calen­
dars to find your favorites. (For more on contest calendars, see the upcoming
section, “The beginning contester.”)

179

180 Part III: Hamming It Up
Most contests run annually and occur on the same weekend every year. The
full-weekend contests generally start at 0000Z (Friday night in the United
States) and end 48 hours later on Sunday at 2359Z. You don’t have to stay up
for two days, but some amazing operators do! Most contests have a time limit
or much shorter hours.

Table 11-2

Popular Contests

Contest Name

Sponsor

North American QSO Parties

National Contest Journal
(www.ncjweb.com)

ARRL January VHF Sweepstakes

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

ARRL DX

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

CQ WPX

CQ Magazine (www.cq-amateurradio.com)

ARRL June VHF QSO Party

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

Field Day

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

IARU HF Championship

IARU (www.arrl.org/contests)

Worked all Europe (WAE)

DARC (www.darc.de/referate/dx/
fed.htm)

ARRL September VHF QSO Party

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

CQ WW

CQ Magazine (www.cq-amateurradio.com)

ARRL Sweepstakes

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

ARRL 160-Meter Contest

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

ARRL 10-Meter Contest

ARRL (www.arrl.org/contests)

Operating in contests
Don’t be intimidated by the rapid-fire action that occurs during contests.
Contesting is nearly unique as a sport in that the participants score by coop­
erating with each other. Even arch-rivals need to put each other in the log for
points. The Big Guns need and want your contact. All of the participants want
to talk to you.

Chapter 11: Specialties
You needn’t have a huge and powerful station to enjoy contesting — most
contesters have a simple setup. Besides, the most important part is the oper­
ator. By listening, knowing the rules, and having your station ready to go,
you’re all set.
Here’s an example of a typical contest contact — in this case my own state’s
contest, the Washington State Salmon Run. (State contests are often referred to
as QSO Parties to emphasize their easy-going style.) In this scenario, I’m NØAX
in King County, calling CQ to solicit contacts, and you’re W1AW in Connecticut,
tuning around the band to find Washington stations. The information we
exchange is a signal report (see Chapter 8) and my county and your state,
because you’re not in Washington.
NØAX: “CQ Salmon Run CQ Salmon Run from Norway Zero Alpha X-ray”
You: “Whiskey One Alpha Whiskey” (Note that you just send or say your
call sign once, using standard phonetics on voice transmissions.)
NØAX: “W1AW you’re five-nine in King County”
You: “QSL, NØAX you’re five-nine in Connecticut”
NØAX: “Thanks, QRZed Salmon Run Norway Zero Alpha X-ray”
The whole thing takes about ten seconds. Each station identifies and
exchanges the required information. The “five-nine” is the required signal
report signifying “loud and clear.” That’s an efficient contest contact and
most are not much different from that. After the contact is completed, keep
tuning for another station calling, “CQ Contest.” This method of finding sta­
tions to call is known as Search-and-Pounce operation, or S&P.
What if you miss something? Maybe you just tuned in the station and the band
is noisy or the signal is weak. My response to your call sounds like this:
NØAX: “W1AW you’re five-nine in “
You: “Sorry, please repeat your county”
NØAX: “Kilo India Norway Golf, King County”
You: “QSL, NØAX you’re five-nine in Connecticut” and so forth
You’re probably thinking, “But I missed the county, how can the signal report
be five-nine?” By convention, most contesters just use “five-nine” (or send 5NN
on Morse code — the “N” represents an abbreviated “9” — a very common
substitution for all contacts) because the type of report doesn’t affect the
score unless it’s miscopied.
Contesting is no more complicated than getting your sandwich order taken at
a busy deli counter during lunch hour. Contesting has a million variations,
but you’ll quickly recognize the basic format.

181

182 Part III: Hamming It Up
Your score consists of QSO points and multipliers. Each contact counts for one
or more QSO points, sometimes depending on the mode, band, or other spe­
cial consideration. Multipliers — so named because they multiply QSO points
for the final score — are what make each contest an exciting treasure hunt.
Depending on the theme, you may be hunting for states, grids, counties, light­
houses, islands, who knows? Read the rules carefully for how the multipliers
are counted: only once, once per band, once per mode, and so on. Special
bonus points may be awarded for working certain stations or multipliers.

The beginning contester
Start by finding out what contests are running. Many places list when contests
are held or identify a contest you find on the air. Table 11-3 shows several
sources, or you can enter contest calendar into a Web search engine. Most
Web sites include the contest rules or a link to the contest sponsor’s Web site.

Table 11-3

Contest Calendars

QST

Where to Go

ARRL Contest Calendar

www.arrl.org/contests/calendar.
html

WA7BNM’s Contest Calendar

www.hornucopia.com/contestcal

SM3CER’s Contest Calendar

www.hornucopia.com/contestcal

ARRL “Contester’s Rate Sheet”

Biweekly e-mail newsletter, free to ARRL
members (www.arrl.org/contests/
rate-sheet/about.html)

VK4DX’s Contest Calendar

www.vk4dx.net

After you know the rules, listen to a participating station. The most impor­
tant part of each contact is the information passed between stations, known
as the exchange. For most contests, the exchange is short — a signal report
and some identification such as a serial number (the count of contacts you
made), name, location, or club membership number. By reading the rules or
simply listening, you know what is required and in what order to send the
information.
Logging contacts on a computer (using a special program just for contests)
makes contesting easier. However, don’t worry about computer logging right
away. Pencil and paper is much easier to deal with as a beginner. Often, the
contest sponsors have a log sheet that you can print out from a Web site con­
taining all the required information.

Chapter 11: Specialties
If you’re unsure of yourself, try “singing along” without actually transmitting.
Make a “cue card” that has all of the information you need to say or send. If
you think you may get flustered when the other station answers your call,
listen to a few contacts and copy the information ahead of time. Serial num­
bers advance one at a time, so you can have all of the information before
your contact.
When you’re ready, give it a try. Remember: You don’t have to be a speed
demon; just be steady. Good contest operators are smooth and efficient, so
just send your full call sign once. If the station answers with your call sign,
log the exchange and send your information only once, even if you are using
a small station. The other operator asks you to repeat yourself if some of the
information is missed.

The regular contester
So, you’ve gotten into a few contests, but when you browse through the scores,
the top scores are just out of sight! How do these guys do it? They will tell you,
“There’s no magic!” Winning contests just comes down to perseverance and
patient practice. The tricks of the trade come with time.
Computer logging makes contesting a lot easier if you are even a modest
typist. The software keeps score, maintains a dupe sheet (a page listing sta­
tions you already worked), shows needed multipliers, connects to DX spotting
networks, and creates properly formatted logs to submit to the sponsors.
I list some of the most popular software programs in Table 11-4, but just
entering contest logger into a Web search engine turns up many different
and useful programs.

Table 11-4

Popular Contest Logging Software

Name of Software

Where Available

CT

www.k1ea.com

TR-LOG

www.qth.com/tr

NA

datom.contesting.com

WriteLog

www.writelog.com

N3FJP Contest Loggers

www.n3fjp.com

N1MM Contest Logger

www.n1mm.com

N1MU Rover Log (for VHF contesting)

roverlog.2ub.org

183

184 Part III: Hamming It Up
If you’re search-and-pouncing, use your radio’s memories or alternate between
the main tuning frequencies. By saving the frequencies of two or three CQ-ing
stations, you can bounce back and forth between several pileups and dramati­
cally improve your rate. Keep a list of stations by frequency (called a band
map) to save time finding them and avoid working them a second time.
Many stations use DX spotting systems to find rare or needed stations in a
contest. You can, too, but be aware that the use of any such assistance you
receive usually puts you in a “multiple-operator” category. Know the rules of
the contest regarding spotting assistance and be sure to submit your score
and log in the proper category.

Calling CQ
To make a lot of contacts, you have to call CQ. In any contest, more stations are
tuning than calling. You can turn those numbers to your advantage. Find a clear
frequency (see the section “Being polite,” later in this chapter) and when
you’re sure it’s not in use, fire away. The following list offers a few examples of
the appropriate transmission when calling CQ in a contest. (In this example,
again assume your call sign is W1AW, and the contest is the Washington State
Salmon Run. Replace these terms with those appropriate to your situation.)
 Voice transmissions: “CQ Salmon Run CQ Salmon Run from Whiskey One
Alpha Whiskey, Whiskey One Alpha Whiskey, Salmon Run”
 Morse code or digital transmissions: “CQ CQ TEST DE W1AW W1AW
TEST”
 VHF/UHF transmissions: “CQ Salmon Run from W1AW grid FN31”
Keep transmissions short and call at a speed at which you feel comfortable
receiving a reply. Pause for two or three seconds between CQs before calling
again. Other stations are tuning the band and can miss your call if you leave
too much time between CQs.
When you get a stream of callers going, keep things moving steadily. Try to
send the exchange the same way every time. Eliminate saying “uh” and “um.”
Take a breath before the exchange and say it all in one smooth sentence. As
you make more contacts, your confidence steadily builds. That efficient
rhythm increases your rate — the number of contacts per minute.
Contesting being what it is, you’ll eventually encounter interference or a sta­
tion that begins calling CQ on your frequency. You have two options — stick it
out or move. Sometimes a simple, “The frequency is in use, CQ contest . . .” or

Chapter 11: Specialties
“PSE QSY”(which means “please change your frequency” in Morse code-ese)
on CW does the trick. Otherwise, unless you’re confident that you have a
strong signal and good technique, just finding a new frequency may be more
effective for you. The higher end of the bands is often less crowded and you
may be able to hold a frequency longer.

Submitting a log
When you finish operating, if you want to see your score in the results, follow
the instructions in the rules to submit your log. Most sponsors now accept
logs via e-mail — usually as a text file. Many of the larger contests require or
encourage the use of the Cabrillo format for logs, which is just a type of form
letter that your logging software can generate. Check with the software author
or contest sponsors if you’re unsure. Even if you’re not interested in having
your score in the results, submitting your log just for the sponsor to use for
checking other logs (called submitting a check log) is appreciated by the
sponsors to improve the quality of the final scoring.
If you decide to mail in a paper log or disk, be sure all of the required infor­
mation is included. Use a disk or CD mailer for protection. Many sponsors
post a Logs Received Web page so that you can be sure yours was received.
Don’t miss the deadline for submitting logs!

Being polite
Large contests can fill up most or all of a shortwave band, particularly during
voice-transmission contests, and often causes friction with non-contest oper­
ators. As in most conflicts, each side needs to engage in some give-and-take
to keep the peace. If you’re participating in a contest, be courteous and make
reasonable accommodations for non-contesters. If you’re not contesting, rec­
ognize that large competitive events are a legitimate activity and you need to
be flexible in your operating expectations.
That said, how can you get along with everyone? First, be sure your signal is
clean, not distorted or generating key clicks. (You might hear about such
problems from stations operating near you.) A distorted signal’s intelligibility
is greatly reduced. A clean signal gets more callers every time and occupies
less bandwidth. Keep your noise blanker and preamp off (read about these
devices in the technical supplement on the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site
or in your radio’s operating manual) and use every receiver adjustment on
the front panel, including the front-end attenuator.

185

186 Part III: Hamming It Up
Second, listen before you leap. Non-contest contacts are more relaxed with
longer pauses, so a couple of seconds of dead air doesn’t mean the frequency
is clear. Asking “Is the frequency in use?” (or “QRL?” in Morse code) before call­
ing CQ is the right thing to do whether you’re in a contest or not. If a Morse
code contact is ongoing, the response to your query may be just a “dit” (mean­
ing “Yes, it’s busy”) if the other operator is in the middle of trying to copy an
exchange from a different station. When in a contest, keep a minimum of 1.5
kHz between you and adjacent contest contacts on phone and 400 Hz on CW.
Don’t expect a perfectly clear channel. Contesters should tune higher in the
band to find less-congested frequencies and give non-contest QSOs a littlewider margin.
Avoid major net frequencies, such as the Maritime Service Net on 14.300
MHz. Be aware of any emergency communications declarations or where
regional emergency nets may meet and give those frequencies a wide berth.
Calling frequencies are often busy with non-contest activity.

Learning about contesting
I’ve only been able to touch lightly on many important topics. After you start,
many resources are available to the novice and master contester alike that
can help them learn and improve. Many cost little or nothing — only the time
to find and read about them.
QST and CQ magazines both feature contest results and articles on technique.
The ARRL also publishes the National Contest Journal (www.ncjweb.com),
which sponsors several HF contests every year and features interviews with
contesters, plus articles and columns on contesting. ARRL members can
receive the biweekly e-mail newsletter The Contester’s Rate Sheet (www.arrl.
org/contests/rate-sheet) without charge. The CQ-Contest e-mail mailing
list is a source of many good ideas. Subscribe to it at www.contesting.com.
The best way to learn is to work with an experienced contester. Probably one
or two multiple-operator stations in your region are active in the big contests.
Look through the results of previous contests for their call signs. Contact the
station owner and volunteer to help out — most are eager to have you on
board or can help you find another team. As a rookie, expect to listen, log, or
spot new multipliers — all valuable learning opportunities. When you know the
ropes, you can fill in on the air more and more.
Along with the multi-operator stations, many contest clubs are around the
country. Look at the club scores in the writeups and contact them. All con­
testers started just like you.

Chapter 11: Specialties

Chasing Awards
If the awards I mention in the section on DX-ing piqued your interest, the fol­
lowing sections discuss awards in greater detail. Seeking awards is one of the
most fulfilling activities in the hobby of ham radio. Certificates are the usual
reward and are often referred to as wallpaper. Indeed, some radio shacks that
I’ve visited are often literally papered (ceilings, too) with certificates and
awards. They come in all shapes, sizes, and colors. Some wallpapers are plain
and other wallpapers are as colorful and as detailed as paintings or photo­
graphs. If awards sound interesting, you may be a member of the species of
ham known as the paper chaser or wallpaper hanger! Believe me, a lot of them
are out there!

Finding awards and special events
CQ magazine runs a column featuring novel awards every month. The K1BV
Awards Directory lists more than 3,000 DX awards from nearly every country!
Want to try for the “Tasmanian Devil” award? Contact VK7 (Tasmania’s prefix)
amateurs. How about the South African Relay League’s “All Africa” award for
contacting the six South African call areas and 25 other African countries?
Most awards have no time limit, but some span a given period, often a year.
For example, the ARRL’s Millenium DXCC Award was for contacts during the
year 2000. Whatever your tastes and capabilities, you can find awards that
suit you. You can find the awards directory and an extensive list of Web links,
along with the K1BV directory at www.dxawards.com/book.html.
Along with ongoing awards programs, you can find many special event sta­
tions and operations. These often feature special call signs with unusual pre­
fixes, of great interest to hams chasing the WPX award, and colorful, unusual
QSL cards. Ham stations are often part of large sporting events or public fes­
tivals, such as international expositions and the Olympics. Some events are
as small as a county fair, such as the Calaveras County Frog Jumping Jubilee
whose station generated the novel certificate shown in Figure 11-3. The larger
special event stations are well publicized and are listed on Web pages such as
www.arrl.org/contests/spev.html or on the ham Internet portals I dis­
cuss in Chapter 3. Other special event stations just show up unannounced on
the air, which makes finding them exciting.

187

188 Part III: Hamming It Up

Figure 11-3:
The
Calaveras
Amateur
Radio
Society
sponsored
this amusing
certificate.

Getting the contacts
Before embarking on a big adventure to achieve an obscure award, find out if
it is still active by checking with the sponsors. Beware of outdated Web sites,
too. Before proceeding, get a positive “go ahead” if you have the slightest
question if an award program is active.
Determine whether the award requires you to submit QSL cards. Overseas
sponsors may allow you to submit a simple list of contacts complying with
their General Certification Rules (GCR) in place of having to submit actual
cards.
When you make an eligible contact, be sure to log any information that the
award may require. For example, if you’re working Japanese cities, some
awards may require that you get a city number or other ID. This information
may or may not be printed on the other station’s QSL card you receive for the
contact, so you need to ask for the information during the contact itself. Grid
square information is not always on QSLs, either. Be sure to ask during the
contact or with a written note on the QSL you send!

Chapter 11: Specialties
If you make a contact for an award favoring a certain geographic area, ask the
station if he or she would let others know you’re chasing the award. That may
even generate a couple more contacts right on the spot! Certainly, the request
lets his or her associates know to listen for you on the band or perhaps arrange
a schedule. This technique helps a lot with difficult awards or remote areas.

Applying for awards
When applying for an award, be sure to use the proper forms, addresses, and
forms of payments. Make sure you follow the instructions to the letter for sub­
mitting your application. If you aren’t certain, ask the sponsor. Don’t send your
hard-earned QSLs or money before you’re convinced you know what to do.
You often see IRCs accepted in place of cash. An IRC is a postal system Inter­
national Reply Coupon. These are sold by post offices around the world and
are good for one unit of surface postage in the receiving country. Because
foreign currency may not be accepted (or even legal!) in some countries, the
IRC is a form of “ham dollars” that you can exchange for postage or awards.
You can read all about IRCs at www.upu.int/irc/en/index.html#zone_
reserve.
When you do apply for the awards, you may want to send the application by
registered or certified mail, particularly if precious QSLs, cash, or IRCs are
inside. Outside the developed countries, postal workers are notorious for
opening any mail that may contain valuables. Make your mail look as boring
and ordinary as possible. Keep envelopes thin, flat, and opaque.

QRP: Low-Power Operating
Whole books have been written about using QRP, or low-power operating
(sometimes called flea power), and many low-power devotees are on the air.
Why would you want to use low power and a weak signal instead of high
power and a strong signal? For the same reason there are fly fishermen and
free-climbers: skill. Putting as little as possible between yourself and the sta­
tion at the other end and still making the contact takes skill. Build up a little
experience and then give QRP a try.
QRP is up to 5 watts of transmitter output power on Morse code transmis­
sions and 10 watts of peak power on voice, usually SSB. The quality of your
antenna or location is not considered; just transmitter power. If you choose
to turn the power down below a watt, that’s called milliwatting.

189

190 Part III: Hamming It Up
QRP is primarily an HF activity and the majority of QRP contacts are in Morse
code due to its efficiency. QRPers often hang out around their calling frequen­
cies, shown in Table 11-5. To start QRP-ing, just tune to a clear frequency
nearby and call CQ — no need to call CQ QRP unless you specifically want to
contact other QRPers. Here’s how it works.

Table 11-5

North American QRP Calling Frequencies

Band (Meters)

Morse Code (MHz)

Voice (MHz)

160

1.810

1.910

80

3.560

3.985

3.710
40

7.040

7.285

7.110
30

10.106

20

14.060

17

18.096

15

21.060

14.285

21.385

21.110
12

24.906

10

28.060

28.885

28.110

28.385

6

50.060

50.885

2

144.060

144.285 (SSB)
144.585 (FM)

If you’re just getting started, tune in a strong signal and give them a call with
your transmitter output power turned down to QRP levels (check the radio
operating manual for instructions). Make sure your transmissions are clear,
which allows the other station to copy your call sign easily. Some low-power
stations send their call with “/QRP” tacked on to the end to indicate they’re

Chapter 11: Specialties
running low power. This procedure isn’t really necessary during the initial
call and can be confusing if your signal is weak. After all, that’s four more
characters for the other station to copy, isn’t it?
QRPers delight in building their own equipment, and the smaller and lighter
the better. You can find a lot of kits, such as the popular (and tiny) RockMite
transceiver shown in Figure 11-4, and home-brew designs for the ham with
good construction skills. QRPers probably build more equipment than those
in any other segment of the hobby, so if you want to learn about radio elec­
tronics, you may consider joining a QRP club and one of the QRP e-mail mail­
ing lists.
QRP-only contests and QRP categories are in nearly all of the major contests.
Many awards have a special endorsement for one-way and two-way QRP. The
QRP clubs themselves have a whole set of awards, of which my all-time favorite
is the 1,000 Miles Per Watt award (www.qrparci.org/arciawds.html). Some
stations make contact with so little power that their figures are in the millions
of miles per watt!

Figure 11-4:
The
RockMite
transceiver
fits in a
mints tin!

191

192 Part III: Hamming It Up
QRPers are an enthusiastic and helpful lot, always ready to act as QRP Elmers.
Their clubs and magazines are full of “can-do” ham spirit. I list the QRP
resources in Table 11-6, which includes the larger QRP organizations, e-mail
reflectors, and magazines.

Table 11-6

QRP Operating Resources

Resource

Address or Source

Description

QRP Amateur Radio
Club, International

www.qrparci.org

QRP Quarterly magazine and
numerous awards

American QRP Club

www.a-qrp.org

Extensive kit-building and
construction resources,
Homebrewer magazine

G-QRP Club

gqrp.com

Lots of building and operating
information, SPRAT magazine

Adventure Radio
Society

www.arsqrp.com

Emphasis is on portable
operation

QRP-L e-mail
reflector

listserv.lehigh.
edu/lists/qrp-l

Best-known QRP e-mail
reflector, includes archives for
e-mail, files, and articles

QRP forum

www.eham.net/
forums/QRP

Wide variety of topics

Magazine columns
about QRP

QST “QRP Power,”
Worldradio “QRP”

A different technical or
operating topic with every issue

CQ Magazine “QRP”
QRP contests

QRP ARCI Spring and
Fall QSO Parties (www.
qrparci.org)

The largest low-power
operating events of the year

Adventure Radio
Society “Adventure
Sprints” (www.
arsqrp.com)

A monthly low-power contest
emphasizing portable operation

QRP Contest Calendar
by N2CQ (www.amqrp.

A comprehensive listing of QRP
events throughout the year

org/contesting/
contesting.html)

Chapter 11: Specialties
The major QRP gatherings that occur every year are:
 Dayton Hamvention: This gathering is called “Four Days in May.”
QRPers come from all around the world to attend and enough of them fill
a hotel and have their own mini-convention.
 Pacificon: West Coast QRP enthusiasts put on this convention in
October in the San Francisco area.
 Frederichshafen: European QRPers get together at this giant hamfest.
Look for smaller QRP forums or mini-conventions held as part of regional ham
conventions or hamfests.

Getting Digital
Operating on the digital modes (transmitting signals encoded as a stream of
data, instead of speech or Morse code) is the fastest growing segment of ama­
teur radio today. Hams are using fast computers to create some novel means of
communications. Not only are hams adapting commercial technologies such as
the Internet standard TCP/IP protocols, but also creating entirely new ones,
such as PSK and Throb.
On HF bands, digital data transmission protocols must overcome the hostile treat­
ment given to delicate bits and bytes by the ionosphere and atmospheric noise.
The protocols (such as PSK31, PACTOR, Throb, and so on) tend to use short
transmissions, with robust error detection and correction mechanisms. Limits on
transmission bandwidth also contribute to low data transmission rates, but these
restrictions have also stimulated hams into the creation of interesting protocols.
On VHF bands, digital data modes have fewer restrictions on bandwidth. For
example, on 440 MHz and up, you can use 56k baud technology. The bands
are quieter, with less fading and interference, so data speeds begin to approx­
imate those of dial-up landline services.

Radioteletype (RTTY)
CW, or Morse code, is really the first digital mode, but the first fully automated
data transmission protocol was radioteletype. Commercialized in the 1930s,
RTTY, or ritty to hams, uses a 5-bit code known as Baudot — the origin of the
word “baud” used in digital transmission today. The Baudot code sends plain
text characters as 5-bit codes that use alternating patterns of two different
audio frequencies known as mark and space, creating a type of modulation
called Frequency Shift Keying or FSK.

193

194 Part III: Hamming It Up
The tones, 2125 Hz (mark) and 2295 Hz (space), fit within a normal voice’s
bandwidth and thus the RTTY signal can be transmitted with a regular SSB
transceiver in place of a voice signal. The rate at which characters can be
sent is from 60 to 100 wpm. On the receiving end, an SSB transceiver receives
the transmission as an audio signal.
The text characters are turned into and recovered from the pair of mark and
space tones by either a computer/sound card combination or by a standalone
modulator/demodulator. Fans of the antique teleprinters that used rotating
mechanical contacts and briefcase-sized tone encoding equipment keep them
running and use them on the bands even today. If you get a chance to watch
one at work, you’ll be amazed at their mechanical complexity!
If you are using a computer to convert the RTTY signal to readable text, the
decoding software will present a visual display that allows you to adjust your
receiver so that the audio tones are received as the proper frequencies (2125
and 2295 Hz) for the software to decode into characters. RTTY operators some­
times send “RYRYRYRYRY . . .” which results in a repeating tone sequence of
mark followed by space that allows a listening operator to tune in their signal.
Although RTTY is being supplanted by the more modern modes developed in
the past decade, it is still a strong presence on the bands. Tune through the
digital signals above the CW stations and you hear lots of two-tone signals
“diddling” to each other. A sizeable community of RTTY DXers and several
major award programs have RTTY endorsements. DX-peditions often include
RTTY in their operating plan, as well. Table 11-7 lists several online resources
for beginning RTTY operators.

Table 11-7

RTTY Resources

Resource

Description

AA5AU’s RTTY Page (www.aa5au.
com/rtty)

Web site with lots of tutorial
information, links to RTTY programs,
troubleshooting, RTTY contesting

RTTY e-mail reflector (subscribe at

International membership e-mail
group

lists.contesting.com/
mailman/listinfo/rtty)

MMTTY software site (www.qsl.
net/mmhamsoft/mmtty)

Most popular RTTY software for
computers

DJ3NG’s RTTY Contesting Site (www.

RTTY contest calendars, results, and
upcoming events

rtty-contest-scene.com/
index1.html)

Chapter 11: Specialties

TOR modes — AMTOR, PACTOR
TOR is an acronym for Teleprinting Over Radio, which means that TOR sys­
tems send text characters. A user of RTTY quickly discovers that the fading
and distortion common on HF can do serious damage to characters sent
using the Baudot code. The TOR systems include data organization and errorcorrection mechanisms to overcome these limitations.
AMTOR was the first TOR system for amateurs, adapted from a commercial
technology called SITOR in the early 1980s. Like RTTY, AMTOR uses frequencyshift keying to generate the on-the-air audio. Characters are 7 bits long
(Baudot uses 5) and sent in short blocks with pauses between them to allow
other stations to respond. This system makes AMTOR transmissions sound
like regularly-spaced chirps on the air. Two stations in contact using AMTOR
chirp alternately at each other as they exchange the blocks of characters.
AMTOR has two modes, depending on whether a station is calling CQ or in
contact with another station. When calling, because no receiver reports
errors, blocks of five characters are sent twice. After two stations establish
contact, the transmitting station transmits groups of three characters, paus­
ing for a “received OK” chirp from the receiving station. AMTOR has proven
to be reliable, but is fairly slow and cannot send regular data.
PACTOR addresses some of AMTOR’s flaws with an improved data structure
and better error management mechanics. Less overhead is associated with
transmissions using PACTOR and the protocol adjusts its speed based on
conditions. PACTOR II is an improved version that is backwards-compatible
with PACTOR, but has the ability to use a more advanced modulation tech­
nique called Phase Shift Keying (PSK) to increase the data rate. The manage­
ment of the transmission and reception process is also much improved over
PACTOR. PACTOR III is the most recent release of this technology. All ver­
sions of PACTOR are proprietary designs and only available in equipment
available from the manufacturer, Special Communications Systems.
Other similar data modes include the proprietary CLOVER, CLOVER II, and
CLOVER 2000 protocols developed by HAL Communications. These modes
use increasingly intelligent management of the way the data transmission and
reception protocols react to band conditions. The transmitted waveform
shapes and frequencies are carefully managed to keep the signal within a 500
Hz bandwidth and decrease errors caused by HF propagation.
You can find a discussion of the TOR modes mixed in with a discussion of all
of the other digital modes, so the best resources for AMTOR and PACTOR are
on Web pages that cover many different modes. The ARRL digital data Web
page at www.arrl.org/tis/info/digital.html has links to numerous
useful sites.

195

196 Part III: Hamming It Up
Packet
Packet is short for packet radio, a radio-based networking system based on
the commercial X.25 data transfer protocol. Developed by the Tucson Amateur
Packet Radio group, or TAPR, packet’s ability to send error-corrected data
over VHF links enabled a number of novel new data systems to be created for
hams. Table 11-8 lists three excellent online resources for packet radio users.

Table 11-8

Packet Resources

Resource

Description

TAPR Packet Radio page (www.tapr.
org/tapr/html/pktf.html)

Encyclopedic collection of links and
tutorials

ARRL Introduction to Packet (www.
arrl.org/tis/info/pdf/
49244.pdf)

Article explains packet radio
operation

Packet newsgroup (rec.radio.
amateur.digital.misc)

Discussions include packet radio
topics

With packet, ordinary VHF/UHF FM transceivers transfer the data as audio
tones. An external modem, called a Terminal Node Controller (TNC),
Multimode Communications Processor (MCP), or sometimes a Multiple
Protocol Converter (MPC), provides the interface between the radio and a
computer or terminal. Data is sent at either 1200 or 9600 baud as packets of
variable length, up to about 1,000 bytes. The protocol that controls packet
construction, transmission control, and error correction is called AX.25, for
Amateur X.25. Packet systems can also use the TCP/IP protocol and a number
of packet systems use it.
Like wired networks, packet systems are connected together in many different
ways. Packet networks extend across most of the United States and Europe,
with gateways to the Internet in several places. A packet controller is called a
node. The connection between nodes is a link. Connecting to a remote node
by using an intermediate node to relay packets is called digipeating. A node
that does nothing but relay packets is a digipeater. A node that makes a con­
nection between two different packet networks or between a packet network
and the Internet is called a gateway.
Packet radio, using its 1200- or 9600-baud protocol, does not attempt to com­
pete with the higher speeds of WLAN technology. A number of groups are
now beginning to use WLAN hardware on the amateur bands (see the section,

Chapter 11: Specialties
“Amateur WLAN and high-speed data”). Packet remains in use around the
United States for now — particularly as an effective mode of emergency
communications — but look for it to gradually be replaced by more modern
technology.

Bulletin boards
The most common use of packet is to support a packet bulletin board system
(PBBS). A PBBS typically has users from a local area that can contact the
PBBS via a VHF band either directly or by digipeating. The PBBS is operated
just the same as a regular telephone dial-up BBS. In fact, some BBSs support
both types of access.
The PBBS offers file transfer and storage, bulletins, network relay, mailboxes,
and other useful functions. Although the Internet has reduced the impor­
tance of the PBBS in favor of the Web, packet systems are still quite common
and are frequently deployed to support emergency communications.

Packet Cluster
The DX spotting networks now so prevalent on the Internet started as local
groups of DXers using packet radio to relay information about DX stations.
Packet Cluster is a special form of bulletin board software designed by Dick
Newell AK1A to act as an information service for DXers to distribute spots of
DX stations. These bulletin boards are referred to as clusters because the
group was configured as one central information server station surrounded
by client stations that connected to the server by a VHF radio link using the
packet radio AX.25 protocol. Along with DX spots, clusters now handle text
messages, data files, weather, and solar activity data. Packet Cluster has been
adapted for commercial and public safety use worldwide.
The clusters were originally limited to local groups, but quickly grew to
regional networks that now may have hundreds of users connected at any
given time. The radio cluster networks are also connected to the Internet
spotting networks through gateways, so information is collected locally on
VHF, passed through the packet network, exchanged with a network on a dif­
ferent continent via the Internet, and then re-sent via VHF.

HF packet
Although it is poorly suited for the conditions encountered on HF, you can
make packet work below 30 MHz. The main difficulty is that AX.25 packets
are too long for the rapidly changing and noisy HF channels and so an exces­
sive number of packets are rejected due to errors. Retransmission is very
inefficient and so HF packet’s throughput is not very high, leading to it being
rarely used on the HF bands.

197

198 Part III: Hamming It Up
PSK modes
The most exciting new digital mode for use in the HF spectrum is PSK31.
Peter Martinex G3PLX invented the new mode and developed a complete
package of Windows-based software to support it. He generously placed his
creation in the ham radio public domain and hams are adopting it like wild­
fire. If you want to find out more about using PSK31, Table 11-9 contains sev­
eral good reference Web links.
PSK stands for Phase Shift Keying and the 31 represents the miniscule 31.25 Hz
occupied by a PSK31 signal. It also uses a new coding system for characters,
called Varicode, that has a different number of bits for different characters —
not unlike Morse code. Instead of turning a carrier on and off to transmit the
code, a continuous tone is transmitted that signifies the bits of the code by
shifting its timing relationship (known as phase) with a reference signal. A
receiver syncs up with the transmitter and decodes even very noisy signals,
because the receiver knows when to look for the phase changes.
When you tune across a PSK31 signal, the signal doesn’t chirp, but rather
warbles in a very characteristic way. Because the human ear has difficulty
distinguishing between pitches so close together, tuning by ear alone is diffi­
cult. This difficulty brought about a new visual tuning technique, not too dif­
ferent than that used for RTTY.
PSK31 is very tolerant of the noise and other disturbances on HF bands. In fact,
you can obtain nearly solid copy with signals barely stronger than the noise
itself. Figure 11-5 shows the DigiPan software display of several signals, some
quite weak. The lighter streaks represent signals and each horizontal line rep­
resents a new sampling of the receiver’s output. New signals appear at the
top and slowly drift downwards, thus earning the display the “waterfall” name.

Table 11-9

PSK Resources

Resource

Description

Tutorial on PSK31 (www.arrl.org/

Introduces how PSK31 works and
how to operate on the mode

tis/info/HTML/psk31/index.
html)

PSK31 Home Page (aintel.bi.ehu.
es/psk31.html)

The latest updates on the mode and
software to use it

DigiPan Home Page (www.digipan.
net)

Free software to operate PSK31 with
the waterfall tuning display

PSK Mailing List (aintel.bi.ehu.
es/psk31.html)

E-mail reflector for discussion of
PSK31 and the latest variants

Chapter 11: Specialties

Figure 11-5:
A PSK31
QSO using
the waterfall
display of
DigiPan.

Because the bandwidth of PSK31 is so narrow, finding other PSK31 stations
on the air requires a pretty good idea of where they are. The most common
frequencies are 3580.150, 7080.15, 10142.150, 14070.150, 18100.150, and
21080.150 MHz.
Since PSK31’s introduction, a number of enhancements have been made to
the original protocol, including a variant called PSK63 that adds some fea­
tures and quality improvements at the expense of wider bandwidth. PSK31
contests are held everywhere, and a growing community of PSK31/63 users
can be found around the world.

Amateur WLAN and high-speed data
The widespread adoption of wireless LAN technology (WiFi, 802.11b, and
802.11g) by computer users has brought the same technology within reach of
amateurs, as well. Hams share the 2.4 GHz band with unlicensed LAN devices,
but without the power restrictions of consumer equipment.
Ham experimenters are in the process of adapting commercial WLAN proto­
cols to Amateur Radio, with higher transmitter power and larger antennas
than commercial technology to support a set of developmental protocols

199

200 Part III: Hamming It Up
known as High Speed Multimedia Radio (HSMM). The network they envision
is called the Hinternet (for Ham Internet). With the higher power levels per­
mitted for amateurs, their intent is to create long-distance data links that run
at equivalent data rates to the short-range commercial technology available
today. This technology will eventually replace the much slower packet radio
networks in place today.
Some experimental work is being done using spread spectrum modems on
the UHF and microwave ham bands. At present, this is a relatively small com­
munity of experimenters that is attempting to extend the range of commer­
cial technology on amateur frequencies. Momentum is beginning to build for
these modes and the coming years are likely to see an upsurge in amateur
use of these technologies. An amateur satellite (dubbed PANSAT) that would
use spread spectrum modes is in the design stages. TAPR hosts the largest
community of spread spectrum enthusiasts.
If you’d like to know more about HSMM, TAPR, Hinternet, RLAN (Radio LAN),
or amateur use of spread spectrum techniques, here are links to active
groups:
 HSMM Web site: www.arrl.org/hsmm
 TAPR Web site: www.tapr.org
 KB9MWR Web site: www.qsl.net/kb9mwr/projects/wireless/
plan.html

 Green Bay Professional Packet Radio: www.gbppr.org
Amateur radio is also beginning to see the first digital voice links: Icom, one
of the largest radio manufacturers, has introduced its D-Star system of radios,
repeaters, and data link equipment. D-Star is an open standard and amateurs
and other groups are being encouraged to develop interfaces to this equip­
ment. The system uses a high-speed data link that can also be used to trans­
fer data. You can find out more about D-Star at www.icomamerica.com/
amateur/dstar. If history is any guide, other high-speed data technologies
will soon follow. This is an exciting time for digital innovation in ham radio.

APRS
The Automatic Position Reporting System (APRS) is an amateur invention
that marries GPS positioning and packet radio, and was developed by Bob
Bruninga WB4APR. Stations using APRS connect the location data from GPS
receivers to a 2-meter radio and transmit “I am here” data packets. The pack­
ets are either received directly by other hams or by a packet radio digipeater.

Chapter 11: Specialties
If they are received by the digipeater, they may also be received by a gateway
station that relays the call sign and position information to an APRS server
accessed through the Internet.
After the information is received by a server, it’s accessed by using a Web
browser or an APRS viewing program. Figure 11-6 shows a map with the loca­
tion of WA1LOU-8. (“WA1LOU” is a call sign. The -8 is a Secondary Station ID or
SSID so that the call sign is used for several different purposes with different
SSIDs.) You can see that WA1LOU is in mid-Connecticut, 7.9 miles northeast of
Waterbury.You can also zoom in on WA1LOU’s location. If he changes his
position, this change is updated on the maps at the rate he decides to have
his APRS system broadcast the information.

Figure 11-6:
WA1LOU’s
position
reported by
APRS.

If you have a GPS receiver with an NMEA 0183 data output port (NMEA is the
National Marine Electronics Association) and a 2-meter rig and packet radio
TNC (see the discussion on Packet earlier in this chapter), you’re ready to par­
ticipate! (Kenwood even makes APRS-ready 2-meter radios, the TH-D7A and
TH-D700, that are connected directly to a GPS receiver.) The most common
frequency for APRS is 144.39 MHz, although you can use 145.01 and 145.79
MHz. You can find a group of HF APRS users using LSB transmission on 10.151
MHz. (The actual tones are below the carrier frequency of 10.151 MHz and so
fall inside the 30-meter band.)
You can do a lot more with APRS than just report location. Popular mapping
software offers interfaces so that you can have street-level maps linked to
your position in real time by ham radio! Race organizers use APRS to keep
track of far-flung competitors. You can also add weather conditions to APRS
data to contribute to a real-time automated weather tracking network. To find
out more, including detailed instructions about configuring equipment, the
resources listed in Table 11-10 are good starting points.

201

202 Part III: Hamming It Up
Table 11-10

APRS Resources

Resource

Description

“Position Reporting with APRS” (www.

Primer on APRS technology and use

arrl.org/tis/info/HTML/aprs/
pos-reporting.html)

APRS Tracks, Maps and Mobiles,
a book on APRS by WA1LOU

Discover how to track anything that
moves; available from ham radio book
vendors

APRS Home Page (web.usna.navy.
mil/~bruninga/aprs.html)

Bob Bruninga WB4APR’s Web page
describes the current state of the
technology and has many useful arti­
cles and links

TAPR APRS group (www.tapr.org/
tapr/html/gpsf.html)

Extensive information on APRS equipment, tutorials, mailing lists, and
software

N1BQ’s APRS search page (www.
wulfden.org/aprsquery.shtml)

Excellent APRS map server interface;
try entering your zip code into the
APRS activity or weather station
search windows

Operating on the digital modes
You can gain access to the digital modes at very low cost by building or
buying a simple interface between an HF or VHF radio and a computer with a
sound card. This setup allows you to connect your radio and computer
together (the topic of Chapter 15). To use the proprietary PACTOR II or
CLOVER protocols, you need an external MCP (Multimode Communications
Processor) that acts as a modulator/demodulator for several different data
transmission protocols. A long list of suitable software for both sound cards
and MCPs is at home.wanadoo.nl/nl9222/digisoft.htm. To pick up digital
modes quickly, the ARRL has an excellent online course, HF Digital
Communications EC-005 (www.arrl.org/cce/courses.html#ec005).
You find digital data at the upper end of the CW (Morse code) segments of
the HF bands. The signals are mixed in with CW stations and the different
modes generally get along pretty well. RTTY calling frequencies are on sev­
eral bands: 3.590, 7.040, 14.080, 21.080, 28.080, and 50.7 MHz. You can find the
burgeoning PSK community in the vicinity of 3.580, 7.080, and 14.070 MHz.

Chapter 11: Specialties
The overall band plans at www.arrl.org/FandES/field/regulations/
bandplan.html help you locate digital mode watering holes.

Operating via Satellites
Non-hams are usually pretty surprised when you tell them about ham radio
satellites. The first amateur satellite, OSCAR-1 (which stood for Orbiting
Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio), was built by American hams and went into
orbit in 1961, just a couple of years after the Russians launched the Sputnik
satellite, igniting the space race. Today, hams have quite a number of satellites
with missions ranging from digital mailboxes to repeaters to scientific experi­
ments. The latest to go up was built by a group of Saudi Arabian students and
hams; SO-50 or Saudisat 1C. It carries several experiments and a 2-meter FM
repeater.

Satellite basics
Most amateur satellites are located in near-circular Low Earth Orbit, or LEO,
circling the earth a number of times each day. A few have non-circular
“Molniya” orbits that take them high above the earth where they are visible
for hours at a time. (Molniya is “lightning” in Russian and is the name given
to their fleet of communications satellites that travel in elliptical orbits.)
For practical and regulatory reasons, satellite transmissions are restricted to
the bands on 10-meters; on the 2-meter, 70-cm; and microwave bands at 1296
MHz and higher. The ionosphere usually does not pass signals at lower fre­
quencies and satellite antennas need to be small, requiring shorter wavelength.
The input frequencies are called the uplink and the output frequencies are
called the downlink. The numbers that describe a satellite’s orbit (and allow
software to determine where it is) are called the orbital or Keplerian elements.
These pieces of information allow you to operate using a satellite!
You find three common types of satellites.
 Transponder: These satellites listen on a range of frequencies on one
band, translate those signals to a different band, and then retransmit
them in real time.
 Repeater: These satellites act just like terrestrial repeaters, listening and
receiving on a specific pair of channels. Satellite repeaters are crossband,
meaning their input and output frequencies are on different bands.

203

204 Part III: Hamming It Up
 Digital: Digital satellites can act as bulletin boards (BBS) or as store-andforward systems. You can access both types of digital satellites using
regular packet radio protocols and equipment. The International Space
Station (ISS) and Space Shuttle (STS) both have digital BBS systems avail­
able to hams on the ground. The ISS also has an APRS digipeater onboard!
Store-and-forward satellites act as message gateways, accepting messages
and downloading them to a few control stations around the world. The
control stations also pass messages back up to the satellites that are
downloaded by ground-based users. Digital satellites are very useful to
hams at sea or in remote locations.

Accessing the satellites
The best place to go to find out which satellites are active and in what mode
is the AMSAT home page (www.amsat.org). Click the Satellite Frequencies
and Status link to get the complete set of information on what each satellite
does and its current operational status.
To access satellites, you also need a satellite tracking program. Several free
or shareware trackers are available, such as STSPLUS, which is available for a
$15 donation from www.dransom.com/stsplus.html. AMSAT also provides
several tracking and satellite operation programs. After you have the tracking
software, obtain the Keplerian elements for the satellite you’re seeking from
the AMSAT site at www.amsat.org/amsat/keps/menu.html. Enter them into
your software, and make sure that your computer’s time and date are correct.
A complete set of instructions on using the satellites is beyond the scope of
Ham Radio For Dummies, but here is a short example of how to connect to
the packet station aboard the ISS and receive a nice certificate!
You need a 2-meter FM radio with 10 to 25 watts of output. An omnidirec­
tional antenna works and a small beam is even better. You also need a packet
radio TNC, such as a Kantronics KPC-3 or the equivalent. You need a com­
puter running a terminal program, such as Hyperterm or Procomm, logging
information both to and from the TNC.
1. Configure the TNC parameters as follows:
AUTOCR

OFF

LFADD

OFF

MAXFRAME

4

MCON

ON

MCOM

ON (which allows you to see packets from other stations)

Chapter 11: Specialties
MONITOR

ON (ditto)

PACLEN

72 (keeps packets short for fewer errors)

RETRY

8-10

TIME STAMP ON (logs your data to disk)
2. Set your transceiver to receive on 145.800 MHz and transmit on
145.990 MHz.
3. Find the right time.
Use the tracking software to determine when the ISS has a long highangle pass near your location with an elevation of 40 degrees or more to
give you a clear path and a long view. When the time comes, start listen­
ing to the receiver audio.
4. Get the signal.
When you hear a signal, your TNC decodes the packet messages. If the
ISS is already connected to another station, you probably see Index
packets, such as
“RS0ISS-1>N0AX <<I2>>:To : N0AX”

if I (NØAX) am logged onto the ISS system.
Only one station can be logged on at a time, so you need to be sure you
aren’t hearing packets from anyone else before you begin transmitting.
If you do hear packets, watch your screen and wait for this message:
RS0ISS-1>CQ/V [12/30/02 04:20:59]: <<UI>>: - Logged off
“NOW YOU MAY BEGIN CALLING ISS, C RS0ISS”

5. Respond to the ISS.
Tell your TNC to connect to the ISS by typing C RS0ISS-1. If you are suc­
cessful, you receive a message that looks like this:
30-Jun-02 09:03:43 CONNECTED to RS0ISS-1
Logged on to RS0ISS’s Personal Message System on
board the International Space Station

If you are unsuccessful or the ISS system is busy, another pass should
occur shortly — the ISS is up there 24 hours a day. Keep trying. Sooner
or later you’ll get through!
6. Success! Begin celebrating!
After you calm down, politely log off by typing BYE or by using Command
mode of the TNC to disconnect.

205

206 Part III: Hamming It Up
You can find a complete discussion of accessing the ISS at www.marexmg.
org/fileshtml/unprotopage.html. I highly recommend you read this page
before calling the ISS.

Seeing Things — Image Transmissions
So far, all of the ham transmissions I covered have either been voice, data,
or codes. Don’t hams care about pictures and graphics? They do! With the
increasing availability of excellent cameras and computer software, getting on
one of the amateur image modes, such as slow-scan or fast-scan television and
facsimile, is never easier. The next few sections discuss these image modes.
Figure 11-7 shows examples of images sent on each mode.

Figure 11-7:
Pictures
typical of
those sent
by amateur
radio image
modes.

Chapter 11: Specialties

Slow-scan television (SSTV)
and Facsimile (Fax)
Pioneered back in the 1960s, slow-scan has re-emerged in the last ten years as
a popular image mode. You can find slow-scan primarily on HF where SSB
voice transmission is the norm. The name comes from the fact that transmit­
ting the picture over a narrow channel made for voice transmissions takes
several seconds.
You can send slow-scan pictures using a commercial scan-converter that con­
verts the regular camera video to slow-scan formats and an HF transceiver.
SSTV enthusiasts are rapidly eliminating the standalone converters in favor
of a computer with a video camera interface and a sound card. Software is
used both to convert the camera video to data files and to encode and
decode the data files as audio that can be transmitted and received with a
voice SSB transceiver.
You can usually hear slow-scan signals in the vicinity of 14.230 and 21.340
MHz using USB transmissions. Depending on the picture format you use, the
signals make a “loopy loopy loopy” sound with the video and color informa­
tion being encoded as different audio tones. Other tones mark the edges of
the picture frame. Each “loop” is one line of picture. Data file transmissions
may sound more like multiple tones mixed together.
Facsimile-over-radio was at one time a very widely used method of obtaining
weather information from land-based and satellite stations. Transmissions of
Group I and Group II facsimile standard signals could be successfully made
via ham radio transceivers, as well. The use of standalone fax machines and
modems, never very widespread, is rapidly disappearing in favor of transmit­
ting the images as data files, just as with SSTV. Regular fax images can still be
received from orbiting weather satellites, however.
The software packages that transmit data files as SSTV images often make no
distinction between data captured from video and data received from a fax
service. You will find many good links to detailed information about slowscan TV and facsimile transmission at these Web addresses:
 www.ac6v.com/opmodes.htm#SS
 www.arrl.org/tis/info/sstv.html
 www.arrl.org/tis/info/wefax.html

207

208 Part III: Hamming It Up
Fast-scan television
You can also send full-motion video, just like regular broadcasters, with fastscan video transmissions. Fast-scan uses the same video standards as broad­
cast and consumer video, so you don’t need to buy special conversion
equipment. This mode is usually referred to as ATV or Amateur Television. It
is most popular in metropolitan and suburban areas where transmission dis­
tances are relatively short. ATV even has its own repeaters!
ATV transmissions are restricted to the 70-cm band and higher frequencies
because of their wide bandwidth — up to 6 MHz. You won’t be able to use
your regular 70-cm transmitter to handle that bandwidth, so you must con­
struct or purchase a transmitter designed specifically for ATV. The transmit­
ters are designed to accept a regular video camera signal, so little extra
equipment, except a good antenna, is required to use ATV.
Because ATV transmissions use the same video transmission format as TV
broadcasters, regular television receivers are used as receivers, with a fre­
quency converter to transfer the ham band ATV signals to one of the higher
UHF TV channels where they are received just like any other TV signal.

Part IV

Building and
Operating a
Station That
Works

T

In this part . . .

o take part in all the ham radio fun stuff, you have
to assemble your own ham radio station. A station
can be pretty simple, but the more you know, the easier
setting yours up is. You start by figuring out what you
want to accomplish with your ham radio and what your
resources are. Then you can choose your radios, anten­
nas, and accessories.
After you get your station together, you discover how to
operate the station and keep simple records. You develop
the savvy to get on the air with a good signal and a deft
hand at the controls. (I wish this book had been around
when I was just getting started!)

Chapter 12

Getting on the Air
In This Chapter
 Making decisions about your station
 Choosing radio equipment
 Picking an antenna
 Computers in the shack
 Buying new or used equipment

O

ne of the most common questions an Elmer (mentor) hears (aside from
“What’s the answer to number 22?”) is “What kind of radio should I
buy?” An honest Elmer always replies, “That depends!” Which antenna to buy
depends on a whole lot of things, too!

Even a casual stroll through the ads in CQ or QST turns up page after page of
colorful photos, with digits winking, lights blinking, and meter needles jump­
ing. Antennas are even more numerous, with elements sticking out every
which way, doodads dripping off of them, and all manner of claims made
about performance. Then you have to sort through nearly an infinite number
of accessories and software packages. The decision can be overwhelming!
How do you choose between them?

Setting Goals for Your Station
Don’t tell anybody, but you’re about to embark on a journey called “system
design.” You may think making decisions is impossible, but all you have to do
is a little thinking up front.

Goals and personal resources
You can find a lot of different activities in ham radio — casual, competitive,
technical, public service — which I cover in Part III. While participating in

212 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
many of them using the same equipment is possible, before you begin acquir­
ing additional equipment is the time to consider these questions:
 What attracted you to ham radio the very first time?
 After reading about the different operating activities and modes avail­
able, can you pick two or three that really pique your interest?
 If you know and admire a ham, does he or she do something that you
want to do?
 Are you most attracted to the shortwaves or to the VHF and UHF bands?
 What sounds most intriguing — the new digital modes, chatting by
voice, or mastering Morse code?
 Will you operate from home, while mobile, or portable? (Or all three?)
 Do you intend to participate mainly for enjoyment or for a specific pur­
pose, such as emergency or travel communications?
All these considerations color your choice of equipment. Knowing your ham
radio resources is also important:
 What’s your budget for getting on the air?
 How much space do you have available for your shack?
 How much space do you have for antennas?
Now comes the fun part — shopping and choosing!
To get an idea of what products are available, the advertisements in recent
copies of QST, CQ, and WorldRadio magazines show models that are recently
introduced. If you have a license, no doubt you receive a copy of a catalog
from Ham Radio Outlet (HRO) or Amateur Electronic Supply (AES), two of the
large, nationwide equipment distributors. Perhaps MFJ Enterprises sent you
a catalog with its extensive line of accessories. If you have a local radio store,
make a visit and browse through the catalogs and product brochures. Inquire
about upcoming sales or promotions. The goal is to gather a wide variety of
information.

Operating from home
A home station is a semi-permanent installation. Along with the radio equip­
ment, you need a little furniture and space to put it in. Operating using voice
modes means speaking out loud and probably listening on a speaker. Choosing
an appropriate location for your station can minimize impact on other family
members. For example, a basement shack should not be right under a bed­
room. Garage and attic shacks have wide temperature swings. All in all, a spare
bedroom or dry basement area is about the best place. Try to set up the radio
shack somewhere that is not disruptive and put a good pair of headphones on
your shopping list.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
Because most hams operate with external antennas, plan appropriate ways
of getting feedlines to them. What’s going to hold the antennas up? Larger
structures, such as rotatable beams on masts or towers, may need permits
or approvals.
A big part of the amateur service is being available in emergencies. Because
you may lose power when it’s needed most, consider how you might operate
your station with the AC power off. A radio that runs off of 12 volts can run
from a car battery for a while. All your computing gear and accessories also
need power. If you have a generator, consider how you can power your sta­
tion, if necessary.

Mobile operation
The small all-band, multi-mode radios available today can put HF, VHF, and
UHF bands at your fingertips, so you need to consider those possibilities.
Having an efficient HF mobile antenna is harder, so skew your budget for
mobile antennas towards the HF antenna.
Driving your station creates its own set of unique considerations. Because
vehicles come in so many styles, you need to make a custom installation.
Leave some budget for automotive fixtures and wiring. You may find spend­
ing a few dollars to have a professional shop make recommendations about
power wiring and safety, in particular, prudent.
You can get lots of good ideas by reviewing articles and Web sites featuring
mobile operation. I like K2BJ’s Web site (www.k2bj.com), and a number of
links to other good sites is at www.arrl.org/tis/info/HF-Mobile.html.

Portable operation
With many levels of portable — from minimalist backpacking to parking the
RV — you need to consider being able to carry or pack your entire radio sta­
tion, including your power source. Start by assigning yourself a total weight
budget. Get creative on selecting antennas and accessories to maximize your
options for the radio and power.
Some amazingly small radios are available. These radios aren’t always the
easiest to operate, however. If you’re just starting out, you may want to pass
up the smaller radio in favor of a rig that’s easier to operate and has more
features in order to learn more about operating. With more experience, you’ll
know what features you can do without.
If your station or operating time is limited, concentrate on a single band as
you get started. On HF, 14, 17, and 21 MHz are favorites with the low-power
and portable operators. These frequencies are open for a large portion of the
day and the antennas are small enough to make carrying easy. If you like night­
time operating, 7 and 10 MHz are best. On VHF, 50 and 144 MHz are preferred.
Plenty of operators are on those bands which feature interesting propagation.

213

214 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Operating a hand-held radio
Regardless of what other pursuits you choose in ham radio, you probably
want to have a handheld VHF/UHF radio. They’re just so darn handy! The
hand-held radio can keep you in touch with local family and friends. They’re
very useful on club and personal outings. Many hand-held radios also feature
an extended receive range that may include commercial broadcast stations
or police and fire department bands.
If you’re buying your first hand-held radio, get a simple, single-band model.
You can make a much more informed decision later if you decide to upgrade
to a multi-band model with all the bells and whistles. Simple radios are also
easy to operate. No new radio you can buy will be missing any significant
feature.
If you buy an older used VHF/UHF radio — either hand-held or mobile — be
sure that it has sub-audible tone features built-in. These radios often required
accessory boards or modifications to include the tones. These days, subaudible tone is required, and finding the parts to modify an older rig is hard.
Accessories can extend the life and usefulness of a portable radio, such as
the following:
 The flexible rubber duck antenna supplied with hand-held radios is well
suited for portable use, but isn’t as efficient as a full-sized metal antenna.
An external antenna greatly extends the range of a hand-held radio while
at home.
 Use a high-quality, low-loss feedline for cables of more than a couple of
dozen feet. (See the section titled “Feedline and connectors,” later in
this chapter, for more information on feedlines.)
 A speaker-mike combination allows you to control the radio without
having to hold it up to your face.
 A case or jacket protects the radio against the rough-and-tumble nature
of portable use.
 Spare batteries are a must! If you have a rechargeable battery, be sure to
have a spare and keep it charged. A drop-in charger recharges batteries
faster than the supplied wall-transformer model. If the manufacturer
offers one, a battery pack that accepts ordinary AA-cells is good to have,
especially in emergencies when you may not be able to use a charger.
Regardless of what kind of radio you have, be sure to keep a record of model
and serial numbers. Engrave your name and driver’s license number on the
case in an out-of-the-way location. Mobile and portable radios can be lost or
stolen (fate forefend!). Even larger radios sometimes get pressed into service

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
on portable expeditions. Protect your investment against theft and loss!
Check your homeowner’s and auto insurance for coverage of radio equipment.

Allocating resources
When you start assembling a station, you have a range of items to obtain. Not
only do you have the radio itself, but antennas, accessories, cables, and
power sources. Table 12-1 shows some estimates of relative costs based on
the type of station you’re setting up. If you pick a radio first, the remaining
four columns give you a rough idea of how much you should plan on spend­
ing to complete the station. These figures are approximate, but can get you
started. I assume all the gear is purchased new.

Table 12-1

Relative Expense Breakdowns
Radio
and Power
Supply or
Cables and
Batteries Antennas Accessories Connectors

Total Cost
Relative
to Basic
HF Base

Handheld
VHF/UHF

75%

Incl.

25%

Incl.

0.3

Mobile
VHF/UHF

75%

20%

Not req’d

5%

0.5

All-Mode
VHF/UHF

50%

30%

5%

15%

1.0

Portable HF

75%

10%

10%

5%

0.5

Mobile HF

60%

25%

10%

5%

0.7

Basic HF Base

50%

25%

15%

10%

1.0

Full-Featured HF

75%

15%

10%

5%

2.0

Choosing a Radio
As you can see in Table 12-1, regardless of what kind of station you plan on
assembling, a new radio consumes at least half of your budget, which is only
appropriate because the radio is the fundamental piece of equipment in ham
radio. You interact with the radio more than any other equipment and a poor
performer is hard to compensate for.

215

216 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
HF or shortwave radios
HF radios for the home station fall into three basic categories: Basic,
Journeyman, and High-Performance. Modern radios all have perfectly useable
receive and transmit performance. The differences are found as improved
performance in several key areas: ability to receive in the presence of strongsignals, receive signal filtering and filter control capabilities, coverage of one
or more VHF/UHF bands, operating amenities such as sub-receivers, number
of memories, and built-in antenna tuners to name a few.
 Basic: This radio includes a simplified set of controls with basic receiver
filter and signal adjustments. Controls may be fixed-value with on and off
settings. It also has limited displays and metering, connects to a single
antenna, and has little support for external accessories. A basic radio is
good for a beginning ham and makes a great second or portable radio
later. A computer interface may be available.
 Journeyman: This radio includes all the necessary receive and transmit
adjustments; most with front panel controls. It has an expanded set of
memory, display, and metering functions. You can find models that have
additional bands and support for digital data operations. Internal antenna
tuners are common as are connections for external equipment, such as
transverters and band-switching equipment. A computer interface is avail­
able for control by a computer.
 High-Performance: Extensive set of receive and transmit controls are
available on the front panel or are configurable under a menu system.
A state-of-the-art receiver and sub-receiver are included along with com­
plete interfaces for digital data and computer control. Internal antenna
tuners are standard and some antenna switching is usually provided.
Complete displays and metering, computer-style displays are popular.
Table 12-2 lists some of the more popular candidates in each class. Just
the base models are listed. You may find various suffixes tacked on to indi­
cate enhancements. For example, the IC-746PRO is an enhanced version of
the IC-746, the Elecraft K2 comes in 5-watt and 100-watt output versions,
and the FT-1000 family includes several different variations.

Table 12-2

Home Station HF Transceivers
Basic

Alinco

High-Performance

DX-77

Elecraft
Icom

Journeyman

K2
IC-718

IC-746 (incl. 50/
144 MHz)

IC-756 (incl.
6-meters)

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Basic

Journeyman

High-Performance

Kenwood

TS-570 (S-model
incl. 6-meters)

TS-870, TS-2000
(incl. 50/144/440/
1200 MHz)

SGC

SG-2020 (20 watts
output)

Ten-Tec

Argonaut (20 watts
output)

Jupiter

Orion

Vertex Standard
(Yaesu)

FT-600

FT-840, FT-920
(incl. 50 MHz),
FT-847 (incl. 50/
144/440 MHz)

FT-1000

Choosing a filter
In order to keep nearby signals from interfering with the desired signal, a
receiver uses filters. These filters must pass the desired signal while attenuat­
ing (reducing the strength of) unwanted signals just a few hundred Hz away.
For many years, the only filter components able to accomplish this feat were
quartz crystals, so this type of filter is referred to as a crystal filter. A mechani­
cal filter, similar to crystals, uses vibrating discs. Receiving filters are applied
to the radio signal before it is converted to audio. These filters have a fixed
bandwidth (the range of frequencies they can pass, measured in Hz) and
cannot be adjusted. Find more information on filters on the Ham Radio For
Dummies Web site.
Fixed-width filters are available with several bandwidths. A radio is always
shipped with at least one SSB (single sideband) filter installed (HF radios) or
an FM filter (VHF hand-helds and mobiles). The standard filter bandwidth for
HF SSB operation is 2.4 kHz. Filters with widths of 1.5 to 2.0 kHz are available
for operating under crowded conditions with some loss of fidelity. For Morse
code and digital data, the standard filter is 500 Hz wide and is a good option
to select. Narrower filters down to 250 Hz are available. The most common
filter option to buy is the 500 Hz CW filter, followed by a narrow SSB filter.
Some Journeyman and High Performance-class receivers allow filters to cas­
cade (in other words, the filters are used one following the other) at more
than one intermediate stage. If you can afford the extra expense, purchasing
the extra filters can often make a significant difference in receiving ability,
particularly on a crowded band. To see how cascading works, check out the
Ham Radio For Dummies Web site.

217

218 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Digital Signal Processing (DSP, the P can also stand for processor) refers to a
microprocessor in the radio running special software that operates on, or
processes, incoming signals, usually on the audio signal before it’s amplified
for output to the speaker or headphones. More advanced DSP can act on the
signals at radio frequencies. DSP can perform filtering functions to remove
off-frequency signals, reduce or eliminate several different kinds of noise, or
automatically detect and remove an interfering tone. Such abilities make DSP
filtering much more flexible than the filtering accomplished by a crystal filter,
but DSP performance is just becoming equivalent to that of a good fixed-width
crystal filter. In general, the higher the number of bits specified for DSP and
the higher the frequency at which the DSP functions are performed, the better
the DSP processing performs. (Look in your radio’s operating manual or prod­
uct specification sheet for more information.)

Mobile and portable HF radios
Since the introduction of the Kenwood TS-50, a gold rush of radios has been
designed for the portable and mobile operator. Each year sees more bands
and better features crammed into these small radios. These radios are quite
capable as base stations if space is limited at home or a dual home/portable
station is desired. Many include coverage of VHF and UHF bands.
Be aware that because they are so small, these rigs have to make some com­
promises compared to the high-performance designs. The operator interface
is, by necessity, menu-driven. This menu-driven interface makes some adjust­
ments less convenient, although the most-used controls remain on the front
panel. The smaller rigs don’t include internal antenna tuners at the 100-watt
output level as the larger rigs do.
Where can you fit a radio in your vehicle or boat? If you have an RV or a
yacht, you may not have a problem, but in a compact car or an 18-foot run­
about, the space issue is quite a challenge. Luckily, many radios designed for
mobile use, such as the radio in Figure 12-1, have detachable front panels,
sometimes called control heads. A detachable panel allows you to put the
body of the radio under the dash or a seat or on a bulkhead. If you share the
car or boat, get agreement on where to place the radio before drilling any
holes.
Table 12-3 includes examples of several popular mobile/portable rigs and
some of their features. Like their larger base station cousins, you have to con­
sider many features and different sets of accessories. Because these radios
are small and not all features have a dedicated front panel control, I recom­
mend that you try one before you buy either at a dealers or with a friend who
owns one.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Figure 12-1:
Most mobile
radios have
detachable
front panels,
as this radio
does.

Table 12-3

Mobile/Portable All-Mode HF Transceivers

Model

VHF/UHF
Coverage

Power
Output

General Detachable Receives
Coverage Control
FM
Receive Head
Broadcast

Alinco

DX-70

50 MHz

100 watts

Yes

Yes

No

Icom

IC-706
MKIIG

50/144/
440 MHz

HF - 100w
50 MHz 100w
144 MHz 50w
440 MHz –
20w

Yes

Yes

Yes

IC-703

50 MHz

10 watts

Yes

No

No
(continued)

219

220 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Table 12-3 (continued)
VHF/UHF
Coverage

Power
Output

General Detachable Receives
Coverage Control
FM
Receive Head
Broadcast

TS-50

No

100 watts Yes

No No

50 MHz

HF - 200w
50 MHz 100w

Yes

Yes

No

Vertex FT-100
Standard
(Yaesu)

50/144/440

HF - 100w
50 MHz 100w
144 MHz 50w
440 MHz ­
20w

Yes

Yes

No

FT-817

50/144/440

5 watts

Yes

No

Yes

FT-857

50/144/440

HF - 100w
50 MHz 100w
144 MHz 50w
440 MHz 20w

Yes

No

Yes

FT-897

50/144/440

HF - 100w
50 MHz 100w
144 MHz 50w
440 MHz ­
20w

Yes

No

No

Model
Kenwood
TS-480

Digital data on HF
More and more HF radios are providing a connector or two with a digital data
interface to make connecting a personal computer and operating on the digi­
tal modes, such as PSK31 or RTTY, easier. A few even have a built-in data
modem or a terminal node controller (TNC), which is a type of data modem
used for packet radio (see Chapter 11). The key features to look for are acces­
sory sockets on the radio carrying some of the following signals:
 FSK (Frequency Shift Keying): A digital signal at this connector pin
causes the transmitter to output the two tones for frequency-shift
keying, a method of transmitting using two frequencies, usually used
for radioteletype (RTTY).

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
 Data In/Out: If a radio has an internal data modem, you can connect
these digital data inputs and outputs to a computer. You may need an
RS-232 (a type of serial communication) converter.
 Line In/Out: Audio inputs and outputs compatible with the signal levels
of a computer’s sound card, this input is used for digital data when a
computer sound card is used as the data modem.
 PTT: The same as the push-to-talk feature on a microphone, this input
allows a computer or other external equipment to key the transmitter.
 Discriminator (sometimes labeled DISC): This input is the unfiltered
output of the FM demodulator. External equipment can use this signal
both as a tuning indicator and to receive data.
To find out how to configure a radio to support digital data, look on the manufacturer’s Web site or ask the dealer for the radio manual. Proper connections
for RTTY (radioteletype) operation, packet radio, and other types of digital
data should be included, and you can determine if your favorite mode is sup­
ported. If the manual doesn’t provide an answer, contact the manufacturer to
see if someone can tell you how to hook up the radio. Digital data Web sites
may also have files on how to interface specific radios to your computer.

Making a decision on amplification
I recommend that you refrain from obtaining an amplifier for HF operations
until you have some experience on the air. You need the extra savvy that
experience provides to add an amplifier and then deal with the incumbent
issues of power, feedlines, RF safety, and interference. The stronger signal
you put out when using an amplifier also affects more hams if misadjusted or
used inappropriately. Like learning to drive, perfecting the basic techniques
is best accomplished before taking hot laps in a stock car.
Most HF radios output 100 watts or more, which is sufficient to do a lot of
operating in any part of the hobby. When do you need a full gallon of 1500
watts output or even 500 to 800 watts? Many circumstances occur in which
the extra punch of an amplified signal gets the job done. DXers use them to
make contact over long paths on difficult bands. A traffic handler’s amplifier
gets switched on when a band is crowded or noisy so that the message gets
through clearly. Digital operators use them to reduce the number of errors in
received data. In emergencies, an amplifier may get the signal through to a
station with a poor or damaged antenna.
HF amplifiers come in two varieties: vacuum tube and solid-state. Tubes are
well suited to the high power levels involved. Solid-state amplifiers, on the
other hand, tend to be more complex, but require no tuning or warm-up; just

221

222 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
turn them on and go. Tube amplifiers are less expensive per watt of output
power than solid-state amps, but they are larger and tubes are more fragile.
Don’t attempt to use CB “footlocker”-type amplifiers. Not only are these amps
illegal, but they often have serious design deficiencies that result in poor
signal quality.

VHF and UHF radios
Many HF radios also include 50, 144, and 440 MHz operations. The Kenwood
TS-2000 goes all the way to 1200 MHz! This power makes purchasing a second
radio just for VHF/UHF operating less of a necessity for the casual operator.
Many ham radio shacks have an all-band HF/VHF/UHF radio backed up with a
VHF/UHF FM rig for using the local repeaters and packet radio.
VHF/UHF radios that operate in single-sideband (SSB), carrier wave (CW), and
FM modes are known as all-mode or multi-mode to distinguish them from FMonly radios. If you get serious about operating on those bands and modes,
then you may want to purchase a dedicated radio. VHF/UHF-only multi-mode
rigs are less common than they used to be because many all-band radios now
offer VHF/UHF coverage.
Many of the VHF/UHF all-mode radios have special features, such as full
duplex operation and automatic compensation for transponder offsets, that
make using the amateur satellites easier. (I introduce amateur satellite opera­
tion in Chapter 11.) Satellite operations require special considerations
because of cross-band operation and the fact that they are moving, which
results in a Doppler shift on the received signal.
An all-mode radio can also form the basis for operating on the amateur
microwave bands. Commercial radios are not available for these bands
(900 MHz; 2.3, 3.4, 5.6, 10, and 24 GHz; and up), so you can use a transverter
instead. The transverter converts a received signal on the microwave bands
to 28, 144, or 440 MHz bands where the radio treats it just like any other
signal. Similarly, the transverter converts a low-power (100 milliwatts or so)
output from the radio on back up to the higher band. Bringing the output
signal up to 10 watts or more requires an external amplifier.

FM-only radios
FM on the VHF and UHF bands is used by nearly every ham regardless of
their favorite operating style or mode. A newly minted Technician licensee
can likely use an FM mobile or hand-held radio as his or her first radio. FM

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
is available on the all-mode rigs, but because of the mode’s popularity and
utility, FM-only rigs are very popular. FM radios come in two basic styles:
hand-held and mobile. You can use mobile rigs as base stations at home, too.

Hand-held radios
Hand-held radios come in single-band, dual-band, and multi-band models.
With the multi-band radios covering 50–1296 MHz, why choose a lesser model?
Expense, for one thing. The single-band models, particularly for 2-meters, cost
less than half the price of a multi-band model. You do the lion’s share of operat­
ing on the 2-meter (VHF 144–148 MHz) and 70-cm (UHF 430–440 MHz) bands, so
the extra bands may not get much use.
You can expect the radio to include as standard features encoding and decod­
ing of CTCSS sub-audible tones (tones used to restrict access to repeaters),
variable repeater offsets, at least a dozen memory channels, and a DTMF
keypad for entering control tones (similar to the tones available on a touchtone telephone). A rechargeable battery and simple charger come with the
radio. (I discuss repeater operation in Chapter 9.)
Extended-coverage receiving is a useful feature. I find being able to listen to
broadcast FM and the low-VHF land mobile (public safety agencies, paging,
and businesses use) bands around 2-meters is very useful. In addition, TV
channels 2 through 13 can also receive between 54 and 216 MHz. That’s a
nice emergency feature, as well as entertaining.
What are your power output needs? The tiny credit-card size radios are con­
venient, but don’t pack much of a punch. Unless you live in an area with
excellent repeater coverage, insufficient power leaves you out of touch, per­
haps when you really need it. Get a radio with at least 1 watt of output and
pick up a spare battery, too.

Base and mobile radios
Mobile radios have a similar set of features as hand-held radios regarding
memories, scanning, and controls. The more powerful transmitters used with
an external antenna extend your range dramatically. Receivers in mobile
radios often have better performance than those in hand-held radios — able
to reject the strong signals from land mobile dispatch and paging transmitters
on adjacent frequency bands. Information about how receivers perform in
such conditions is available in product reviews in magazines such as CQ and
QST, on the ARRL Web site (www.arrl.org), and on Web sites such as www.
eham.net and www.qrz.com. Your own club members may have valuable
experience to share, because they operate in the same places as you!

223

224 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
You can often use mobile radios for digital data operation on the VHF/UHF
bands, particularly packet. When limited to 1200 baud data, as modem tech­
nology has advanced, hams have moved to use 9600 baud data. If you plan on
using your mobile rig for digital data, make sure it is data-ready and rated for
9600 baud without modification.
Some rigs claim to be APRS or GPS compatible — what does that mean? First,
check out the descriptions of the Automatic Position Reporting System (APRS)
in Chapter 11. Location information from a GPS receiver is transmitted by
packet to a network of APRS computers over VHF radio. A radio compatible
with APRS has a serial port for the GPS receiver and an internal packet TNC
that can send and receive APRS packets without any other external devices.

VHF/UHF amplifiers
Increasing the transmitted power from an all-mode, hand-held, or even small
mobile radio is common. Amplifiers can turn a few watts of input into more
than 100 watts of output. Solid-state commercial units are known as bricks
because they are about the size of large bricks with heat sinking fins on the
top. A small amp and external antenna can greatly improve the performance
of a hand-held radio so that you don’t need a separate mobile rig.
Amplifiers are either FM-only or SSB/FM models. Amplifiers just for FM use
cause severe distortion of a single-sideband signal. An amplifier designed for
SSB use is called a linear amplifier and SSB/FM models have a switch to
change between the modes. You can amplify Morse code signals in either
mode, with more gain available in the FM mode.
RF safety issues are much more pronounced above 30 MHz because the body
absorbs energy more readily at those frequencies. An amplifier outputs
enough power to pose a hazard, particularly if you use a beam antenna. Don’t
use an amplifier at 50 MHz or above if the antenna is close to people. Revisit
your RF safety evaluation (see the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site) if you
plan on adding a VHF/UHF amplifier to your mobile or home station.

Making a selection
Dozens of hand-held and mobile radios are for sale, so use a checklist of fea­
tures to help you decide on a model. Note the capabilities you want as well
as the ones that fall into the nice-to-have category. A checklist and compari­
son table is available on the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site to help you
sort through the blizzard of features. The blank spaces are for you to add
capabilities.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Choosing an Antenna
I can’t say which is more important: the radio or the antenna. Making up for
deficiencies in one by improving the other is difficult. A good antenna can
make a weak radio sound better than the other way around. You need to give
your antenna selection at least as much consideration as the radio.
This section touches on a number of types of useful and popular antennas. If
you want to know more about antennas and want to try building a few your­
self, you need more information. I can think of no better source for that infor­
mation than The ARRL Antenna Book, now in its 20th edition. Not only a good
ham resource, many professional antenna designers have a copy, too. Highly
recommended! I include a list of useful antenna design books and Web sites in
Appendix B.

HF antennas
At HF, antennas can be fairly large. An effective antenna is usually at least
1
⁄ 4-wavelength in some dimension. On 40-meters, for example, a 1⁄ 4-wavelength
vertical antenna is a metal tube or wire 33 feet high. At the higher HF frequen­
cies, antenna sizes drop to 8–16 feet, but are still larger than even a big TV
antenna. Your physical circumstances have a great effect on what antenna
you can put up. Rest assured that a large variety of designs are available to
get you on the air.
Wires, verticals, and beams are the three basic HF antennas used by hams all
over the world. You can build all these antennas with common tools or pur­
chase them from the many ham radio equipment vendors.

Wire antennas
The simplest wire antenna is a dipole, which is a piece of wire cut in the
middle and attached to a feedline, as shown in Figure 12-2. The dipole gives
much better performance than you may expect from such a simple antenna.
To construct a dipole, use 10- to 18-gauge copper wire. It can be stranded or
solid, bare or insulated. When completed, its length should be:
Length in feet = 468 / frequency of use in MHz
This formula accounts for a slight shortening effect that makes a
1
⁄ 2-wavelength of wire slightly shorter than a 1⁄ 2-wavelength in air. For example,
a dipole for 21.1 MHz is 468 / 21.1 = 22.2 feet long. Allow an extra 18 inches on
each end for attaching to the end insulators and tuning and another foot
(6 inches × 2) for attaching to the center insulator. The total length of wire
you need is 22.2' + 18" + 18" + 12" = 26.2'.

225

226 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
FULL-WAVELENGTH LOOP

HALF-WAVE DIPOLE

Can be any shape, horizontal or
vertical - feed with coax and 2:1 balun

Length = 468/f
(f in MHz, L in feet)
Inverted-V

Feed here for
vertical
polarization

Choke balun

50Ω coax
to transmitter

G5RV DIPOLE by ZR1DQ
Feed here for
horizontal polarization

93‘ 2“

At least 1/4-wavelength at
lowest frequency of use

END-FED RANDOM WIRE
Figure 12-2:
Constructing
the 1⁄ 2-wave
dipole.

36'
36‘ 5''
5“ of
300Ω
Ω
twinlead

Open-wire line to
transmitter, tuner required

Use on
80/40/20/
15/10
meters

Connect to 50Ω
coax, no balun
required

To assemble a dipole, follow these steps:
1. Cut the wire exactly in the middle and attach one piece to each end
insulator, just twisting it back on itself for the initial check.
2. Attach the other end to the center insulator in the same way.
3. Attach the feedline at the center insulator and solder each connection.
4. Attach some ropes and hoist it up in the air.
5. Check the dipole.
Make some short, low power transmissions to measure the SWR
(standing wave ratio) as explained in your radio’s operating manual.
The SWR should be somewhere less than 1.5 to 1 on the frequencies
you wish to use.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
6. If the SWR is low enough at too high a frequency or is lowest at the
high end of the band, loosen the connections at the end insulators and
lengthen the antenna by a few inches on each end.
If the frequency of lower SWR is too low, shorten the antenna by the
same amount.
7. When you adjust the antenna length so that the SWR is satisfactory,
make a secure wrap of the wire at the end insulators and trim the
excess.
You made a dipole! You can follow the same steps, except vary the lengths,
for most simple wire antennas.
You can connect the dipole directly to the transmitter using coaxial cable
and use the dipole on the band at which it is 1⁄ 4-wavelength long or any odd
number of 1⁄ 2 wavelengths. For example, the 66-foot long 7 MHz dipole works
well on the 21 MHz band, too.
Other common and simple wire antenna designs include:
 Inverted-V: A dipole supported at its midpoint with the ends angling
down at up to 45 degrees. This antenna only requires one support and
gives good results in nearly all directions.
 Full-wavelength loop: Attach a feedline at the middle of the loop’s
bottom and erect the loop so that it is vertical. The feedline then works
best broadside to the plane of the loop. These antennas are larger than
the dipoles, but radiate a little more signal in their favored directions.
 Multi-band dipoles: Wires fed at the center with open-wire or ladder-line
feedline and used with an antenna tuner to cover several bands. These
are usually not 1⁄ 2-wavelength long on any band and so are called doublets
to distinguish them from the 1⁄ 2-wavelength long dipoles.
 Trap dipole: Uses some appropriately placed components to isolate por­
tions of the antenna at different frequencies so that the dipole acts like a
simple 1⁄ 2-wavelength dipole on two or more bands.
 The random-length wire: Attach some open-wire feedline 15 to 35 feet
from one end and extend the wire as far and high as you can. A couple of
bends won’t hurt. You have to convert the feedline to coaxial cable using
a balun or antenna tuner. (I describe these on the Ham Radio For Dummies
Web site.) The random wire’s performance is hard to predict, but is an
excellent back-up or temporary antenna.
For more information on these and many other antennas you can build, check
out some of the antenna references listed in Appendix B. If you don’t have the
perfect backyard to construct the antenna of your dreams, don’t be afraid to

227

228 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
experiment. Get an antenna tuner (or use the one in your radio) and put up
whatever you can. You can even bend wires or arrange them at strange angles.
Antennas want to work!

Vertical antennas
Vertical antennas are nearly as popular as wire antennas. The 1⁄ 4-wavelength
and the 1⁄ 2-wavelength antennas are two common designs. Verticals don’t
require tall supports, keep a low visual profile, and are easy to move or carry.
Verticals radiate fairly equally in all horizontal directions, so they are consid­
ered omnidirectional antennas.
The 1⁄ 4-wavelength design is a lot like a 1⁄ 2-wavelength dipole cut in half and
turned on end. The missing part of the dipole is supplied by an electrical
mirror of sorts called a ground screen or ground-plane. A ground screen is
made up of a dozen or more wires stretched out radially from the base of the
antenna and laid on top of the ground. The feedline connects to the vertical
tube (it can also be a wire) and to the radials, which are all connected
together. The 1⁄ 4-wavelength verticals are fairly easy to construct and, like
dipoles, work on odd multiples of their lowest design frequency.
The 1⁄ 2-wavelength verticals are about twice as long as their 1⁄ 4--wavelength
counterparts, but do not require a ground screen. The lack of a ground
screen means that you can mount them on masts or structures away from the
ground and are ground-independent. The feedline is connected to the end of
the vertical, but requires a special impedance matching circuit to work with
low-impedance coaxial feedlines. Several commercial manufacturers offer
ground-independent verticals and many hams with limited space or opportu­
nities for traditional antennas make good use of them.
Both 1⁄ 4-wavelength and 1⁄ 2-wavelength verticals can work on several bands
through the use of the similar techniques used in wire antennas. Commercial
multi-band verticals are available that you can use on up to nine of the
HF bands.

Beam antennas
Any antenna that uses more than one element to focus or steer its listening
and transmitting capabilities toward one direction is called a beam, which is
short for beamforming. Beams can be as simple as two wires or as compli­
cated as more than a dozen pieces of tubing.
The most popular type of beam antenna is called a Yagi, after Japanese scien­
tists, Doctors Yagi and Uda, who invented the antenna back in the 1920s. The
Yagi consists of two or more conducting elements (tubing or wires) parallel
to each other and approximately 0.1 wavelength apart. The element that the
feedline connects to is known as the driven element. Other elements called

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
reflectors and directors are cut to specific lengths and spaced to reflect or
direct the energy in a particular direction. Reflectors and directors, because
they direct the energy without being directly connected to the feedline, are
known as parasitic elements, and Yagi antennas are sometimes referred to as
parasitic arrays. The most common ham Yagi today is a three-element design
(a reflector, a driven element, and a director) that works on three popular
ham bands (20, 15, and 10-meters) and so is called a tri-bander. Yagis are also
made from wires at lower frequencies. Figure 12-3 shows a three-element Yagi
beam on a 55-foot mast whose lowest operating frequency is 14 MHz.
Other beams are made from square or triangular loops. They work on the
same principle as the Yagi, but with loops of wire instead of straight elements
made from rod or tubing. Square-loop beams are called quads and the trian­
gles are called delta loops.
You may encounter another type of beam that looks like an oversized TV
antenna with many angled elements. These beams are log-periodics, or logs,
and the large number of antenna elements enables the antenna to function
over all bands in a certain range, just as TV antennas can receive many chan­
nels. Hams use logs to cover a range of bands (typically 20, 17, 15, 12, and 10­
meters) with a single antenna.

Figure 12-3:
My threeelement
beam
antenna.

229

230 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Whereas wire antennas have a fixed orientation and verticals radiate equally
in all horizontal directions, a beam antenna made from aluminum tubing can
be rotated. The ability to rotate the antenna allows the ham using a beam
antenna to concentrate a signal or reject an interfering signal in a certain
direction. You can place small HF beams on inexpensive masts or roof-top
tripods, although they overload most structures designed for TV antennas.
You also need a rotator that mounts on the fixed support and turns the beam.
You can control the rotator from inside the shack and have a meter to indicate
direction. (See the section, “Supporting Your Antenna,” later in this chapter.)
Most hams start out with a wire or vertical antenna. After you operate for a
while, the signals you hear on the air give you a good idea of what antennas
are effective. After you have some on-the-air experience, you can make a deci­
sion as to whether you need a beam antenna.

VHF/UHF antennas
Most antennas used above 50 MHz at fixed stations are either verticals or
beams. Verticals are used almost exclusively for FM operation, while beams
are used for VHF/UHF DX-ing (contacting a distant station) on SSB and CW.
FM operating is done with vertically polarized antennas because of the mode’s
beginnings in the mobile radio industry. Antennas on vehicles are much sim­
pler to mount vertically. In order to avoid cross-polarization losses (see the
sidebar “Antenna polarization”), the base antennas were also verticals. This
convention is nearly universal. Even if a beam antenna accesses a distant
repeater, its elements are mounted vertically.
SSB and CW operators, on the other hand, use horizontal polarization. Many
of the VHF and UHF propagation mechanisms respond best to horizontally
polarized waves. If you have an all-mode radio and want to use it for both FM
and SSB/CW, you need both vertically and horizontally polarized antennas
available.
A popular and inexpensive vertical antenna is the simple quarter-wave whip,
or ground-plane, antenna, which works the same as its larger HF cousin. Many
hams build a 19-inch long 2-meter ground-plane as a first antenna project.
You can extend the vertical to 5⁄ 8-wavelength versions, which offer a slightly
stronger signal.
A 5⁄ 8-wavelength 2-meter vertical makes a dandy 1⁄ 4-wavelength 6-meter verti­
cal without any modifications!

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Antenna polarization
Antennas radiate and receive electromagnetic
fields composed of an electric and a magnetic
field. Electrons in the conducting surfaces of an
antenna move back and forth (creating a cur­
rent) in the same direction as the oscillations of
the electric field. This action causes currents to
flow in the antenna, which either radiates a
signal if the field is applied from a transmitter via
a feedline or receives a signal if the field is
caused by a distant transmitter.
The alignment of a radio wave’s electric field
with respect to the Earth’s surface is called its
polarization. Because the electric field and
electron movement are parallel, an antenna’s
polarization is the same as the direction in
which its conducting surfaces are arranged.
Vertical antennas are vertically polarized, for
example. Most Yagi antennas are horizontally
polarized.
For the most efficient communications, you
must orient the receive and transmit antennas

so that the electromagnetic fields from each
antenna are aligned. If the antennas aren’t
aligned, then the electric field from the trans­
mitter does not make the receiving antenna’s
electrons move to make a current flow into the
feedline. Such antennas are cross-polarized
and the resulting loss of signal can be substan­
tial. Polaroid sunglasses take advantage of the
fact that most reflected light considered to be
glare is horizontally polarized. By using verti­
cally polarized plastic in the lenses, you can
eliminate glare by cross-polarization.
Polarization is most important at VHF and UHF
where signals usually arrive with their polar­
ization largely intact. On the HF bands, the
ionosphere scrambles the polarization so
that relative polarization is much less impor­
tant. Polarization does affect received signal
strength, however, and deep signal fades
caused by cross-polarization are common at HF.

Because of the reduced antenna size at higher frequencies, the Yagi antennas
used by VHF/UHF DXers can have many more elements than at HF. Five to 7
element beams are common on 50 MHz and more than 20 elements are often
seen at higher frequencies. These very high-gain antennas also have a narrow
beamwidth, which is too narrow for most casual operating. If you choose to
use a beam on these bands, 3 to 5 elements is a good choice on 6-meters and
5 to 12 elements at higher frequencies. These antennas are small enough to
mount and turn using heavy-duty TV antenna hardware.

Mobile and portable antennas
For VHF, antennas for FM use are almost always vertical. The wavelength at
these frequencies is such that a full-sized antenna is the norm. Mobile HF
antennas, however, are generally reduced-size versions of verticals used at

231

232 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
fixed stations. Horizontally polarized mobile HF antennas are rare due to
their size and mechanical considerations. The challenge for mobile HFers is
to get the most efficiency out of a short antenna.
You can mount mobile antennas as removable or permanent fixtures. The
most easily removed antennas are the mag-mount models that use a magnetic
base to hold themselves to a metal surface. Mag-mount antennas are avail­
able from HF through UHF. The drawback is that the installation isn’t as clean
as a permanently mounted antenna. Trunk-mount antennas for VHF and UHF
are semi-permanent and look better. Drilling a hole in your car for a perma­
nent mount looks best of all. All three options are fairly close in performance.
Whichever method you choose, be sure you can remove the antenna from
the mount to deter theft and for clearance, such as in a car wash. You can
generally route antenna cables under trim, carpet, and seats.
For HF, many mobile stations use the “Hamstick”-type antennas attached to a
mag-mount, as seen in Figure 12-4. These antennas are wire coiled on fiber­
glass tubes about 4 feet long, with a stainless-steel whip attached at the top.
The antennas work on a single band and are sufficiently inexpensive that you
can carry a whole set in the car. They require that you change the antenna
when changing bands. Another design uses resonators attached to a perma­
nent base to operate on different bands. You can attach several resonators at
once so that several bands are used without changing the antenna. The res­
onators and fiberglass whip antennas use a standard 3⁄ 8-24 threaded mount.
An adjustable design has become popular in recent years with a moving top
section that allows the antenna to tune over nearly any HF frequency. These
antennas are known as screwdriver antennas because they use DC motors sim­
ilar to those in battery-powered electric screwdrivers. In order of expense,
the Hamstick-type antennas are the most inexpensive and the screwdriver
antennas the most expensive. Performance varies dramatically depending on
mounting and installation, so guaranteeing good results for any of the styles is
difficult.
At VHF and UHF, portable antennas are very small, light, and easy to pack. At
HF, however, the larger antennas are more difficult to deal with. You can try
a lightweight wire antenna if you can find a way to support it above ground.
Vertical antennas need a sturdy base and usually a ground system. Telescoping
antennas may be an option, and you can use the mobile Hamstick-type whips
with a few radial wires.
An antenna that does not present a low SWR (signal wave ratio, a measure of
RF energy reflected back to the transmitter by the antenna) requires a tuner
for the transmitter to output full power, adding weight and expense. The
smaller coaxial feedlines, such as RG-58 types, also have higher losses. Try
out the performance of your antenna and feedline before taking off on a
major adventure. Avoid unpleasant surprises on the back roads!

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Figure 12-4:
A
“Hamstick”type mobile
antenna on
one of my
mobile
adventures.

Feedline and connectors
Gee, how tough can picking a feedline be? It’s just coax, right? Not really, and
you may be surprised at how much feedline can affect your signal, both on
transmit and receive. When I started out, I used 100 feet of RG-58 with a 66­
foot dipole that I tuned on all bands. I didn’t know that on the higher bands I
was losing almost half of my transmitter output and received signals in the
coax! The 50-foot piece I was using on my 2-meter antenna lost an even higher
fraction of the signals.
While losing 50 percent or 3dB (decibels) is only about one-half of an S-unit
(S-units are a measure of signal strength, roughly equivalent to 6dB each), I
lost a few contacts when signals were weak or the band was noisy. To make
up that loss with an amplifier costs around $300. Changing antennas to a
beam with 3dB of gain costs at least that much, not counting the mast and
rotator. That makes the extra $20 to $25 cost of using RG-213 cable look like a
pretty good bargain!

233

234 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Answering the decibel
Time for a refresher on decibels? Decibels,
abbreviated dB, are used to measure a ratio of
two quantities in terms of factors of 10. A
change of a factor of 10 (from 10 to 100 or from
1 to 0.1) is a change of 10dB. Increases are pos­
itive and decreases are negative. You can use
the following formula to calculate dB for
changes in power and voltage:
dB = 10 log (power ratio)
dB = 20 log (voltage ratio)

Decibels add if ratios are multiplied together.
For example, two doublings of power (x 2 x 2)
is 3 dB + 3 dB = 6 dB. A gain of 20 can also be
thought of as x 10 x 2 = 10 dB + 3 dB = 13 dB.

If you memorize these dB-ratio pairs, you can
save yourself a lot of calculating, because a
precise dB calculation isn’t needed very often.
Power x 2 = 3dB
Power x 4 = 6dB
Power x 5 = 7dB
Power x 8 = 9dB
Power x 10 = 10dB
Power x 20 = 13dB
Power x 50 = 17dB
Power x 100 = 20dB

Power x 1/2 = -3dB
Power x 1/4 = -6dB
Power x 1/5 = -7dB
Power x 1/8 = - 9dB
Power x 1/10 = -10dB
Power x 1/20 = -13dB
Power x 1/50 = -17dB
Power x 1/100 = -20dB

A change of one receiver S-unit represents
approximately 6dB.

Table 12-4 compares several popular feedlines in terms of their relative cost
(based on RG-58C/U) and the loss for a 100-foot section at 30 MHz and 150
MHz. The loss is shown in dB and in S-units on a typical receiver, assuming
that one S-unit is equivalent to 6dB.

Table 12-4

Relative Cost and Loss of Popular Feedlines

Type of Line and
Characteristic
Impedance

Outside
Diameter
(in.)

Cost per Foot
Relative to
RG-58C/U

Loss of 100' at
30 MHz in dB
and S-Units

Loss of 100' at
150 MHz in dB
and S-Units

RG-174A/U
(50 ohms)

0.100

0.8

6.4 dB/1 S-unit

>12 dB/
>2 S-units

RG-58C/U
(50 ohms)

0.195

1.0

2.6 / 0.5

6.7 / 1.1

RG-8X
(50 ohms)

0.242

1.5

2.0 / 0.3

4.6 / 0.7

RG-213/U
(50 ohms)

0.405

2.1

1.2 / 0.2

3.1 / 0.5

1" ladder line

1

0.6 to 1.3

0.1 / <0.1

0.4 / <0.1

⁄ 2" or 1"
width

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
The moral of the story is to use the feedline with the lowest loss you can
afford. Open-wire feedline is a special case because you add an impedance
transformer or tuner to present a 50-ohm load to the transmitter, incurring
extra expense and adding some loss.
To save a lot of money on feedline, buy it in 500-foot spools from a distribu­
tor. If you can’t afford to buy the entire spool, share the spool with a friend or
two. Splitting the expense is an excellent club buy and can save more than 50
percent over buying cable 50 or 100 feet at a time. Do the same for coaxial
connectors.
Beware of used cable unless the seller is completely trustworthy. Old cable is
not always bad, but can be lossy if water has gotten in at the end or from
cracks or splits in the cable jacket. If the cable is sharply bent for a long
period, the center conductor can migrate through the insulation to develop a
short or change the cable properties. (Migration is a particular problem with
foam-insulation cables.)
Before buying used cable, examine the cable closely. The jacket should be
smooth and shiny, with no obvious nicks, dents, scrapes, cracks, or deposits
of adhesive or tar (from being on a roof or outside a building). Slit the jacket
at each end for about 1 foot and inspect the braid, which should be shiny and
show no signs of corrosion or discoloration whatsoever. Slip the braid back.
The center insulator should be clean and clear (if solid) or white if foam or
Teflon synthetic. If the cable has a connector on the end, checking the cable
condition may be difficult. Unless the connector is newly installed, you
should replace it, so ask if you can cut the connector off to check the cable.
If you can’t cut it off, you probably shouldn’t take a chance on the cable.
The standard RF connectors used by hams are BNC, UHF, and N-type connec­
tors. BNC connectors are used for low power (up to 100 watts) at frequencies
through 440 MHz. UHF connectors are used up to 2-meters and can handle
full legal power. N connectors are used up through 1200 MHz, can handle full
legal power, and are waterproof when properly installed. (Photos or drawings
of connectors are shown in vendor catalogs, such as The RF Connection cata­
log at www.therfc.com.)
Good-quality connectors are available at low prices, so don’t scrimp on this
important component. A cheap connector works loose, lets water seep in,
physically breaks, or corrodes, eating up your valuable signals. By far, the
most common connector you’ll work with is the PL-259, the plug that goes on
the end of coaxial cables. By buying in quantity, you can get silver-plated,
Teflon-insulated connectors for just over $1 each, a bargain compared to the
price if you buy them individually. Avoid the shiny nickel-plated connectors
as they are difficult to solder.
To crimp or not to crimp? You can install a crimp-on connector quickly and
get reliable service if you use it indoors in low-humidity, mild temperature

235

236 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
environments. Crimping tools, or crimpers, are available for less than $50. If
you have a lot of connections to make, a crimp-on connector may be a good
choice. However, a properly soldered, silver-plated connector outperforms a
crimped connector and can be used outside, too.

Supporting Your Antenna
Antennas come in all shapes and sizes — from the size of a finger to behe­
moths that weigh hundreds of pounds. The one thing that all antennas have
in common is that they need to be clear of obstacles and kept away from
ground level, which is where most obstacles are.
Before you start mounting your antenna, take a minute to review some ele­
mentary safety information for working with antennas and their supports.
The short article at www.arrl.org/tis/info/pdf/0106091.pdf points out
a few of the common pitfalls in raising masts and towers. For working with
trees, aside from common sense about climbing, you may want to consult
with an arborist.

Antennas and trees
Although Marconi used a kite for his early experiments, a handy tree is prob­
ably the oldest antenna support. A tree often holds up wire antennas, which
tend to be horizontal or use horizontal support ropes. The larger rotatable
antennas and masts are rarely installed on a tree, even on a tall, straight
conifer, because of the mechanical complexity, likelihood of damage to the
tree, and mechanical interference between the antenna and tree.
Nevertheless, for the right kind of antennas, a tree is sturdy, nice to look at,
and free! The goal is to get a pulley or halyard into the tree at the maximum
height. If you are a climber (or can find someone to climb for you), you can
place the pulley by hand. Otherwise, you have to figure out some way of get­
ting a line through the tree so you can haul up a pulley. You may be able to
just throw the antenna support line over a branch. Bear in mind that when a
line is pressing against the bark of a tree, the tree can rub and chafe against
the line until the line breaks. (This catastrophe always happens at night, in a
storm, or right before an important contact.) If the line stays intact, the tree
tries to grow around the line, creating a wound, which makes raising or low­
ering the antenna impossible.
If you intend for the tree to support an antenna permanently, bringing in
an arborist or a tree service professional to do the job right, using sturdy,
adequately rated materials, is worth the expense. The Radioworks company
has a good introduction to antennas in trees at www.radioworks.com.html.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Masts and tripods
A wooden or metal mast is an inexpensive way to support an antenna up to
30 feet above ground. If you are handy with tools, making a home-brew mast
is a good project and numerous articles about their construction are in the
ham magazines. Masts are good candidates to hold up wire HF antennas and
VHF/UHF antennas, such as verticals and small beams. If you are just sup­
porting a VHF or UHF vertical, you won’t need a heavy support and can prob­
ably make a self-supporting mast that doesn’t need guy wires. However, if you
have high winds or the mast is subjected to a side load (such as for a wire
antenna), then it needs to be guyed.
One commercially available option is the telescoping push-up mast designed to
hold small TV antennas and often installed on rooftops. Push-ups come in sizes
up to 40 feet with guying points attached. You can also construct masts by
stacking short sections of metal TV antenna mast, but you have to add your
own guying points. You can’t climb either telescoping or sectional masts, so
mounting the antenna and then erecting the whole assembly is up to you. You
can also mount a section or two of stacking mast on a chimney in order to sup­
port a small vertical. Push-up and TV masts are available along with all the nec­
essary mounting and guying materials from RadioShack, hardware, and home
improvement stores.
One step beyond the mast is the roof-mount tripod. The lighter tripods are
used for TV antennas and can hold small amateur antennas. Larger tripods
can handle mid-sized HF beams. Tripods are good solutions in urban areas
and in subdivisions that may not allow a ground-mounted tower. Tripods are
available from several tower and antenna manufacturers.

Towers
By far the sturdiest antenna support is the tower. Towers are available as selfsupporting (unguyed), multisection crank-up, tilt-over, and guyed structures
with heights of 30 feet and up. They are capable of handling the largest anten­
nas at the highest heights, but they are also substantial construction projects,
usually requiring a permit to erect. Table 12-5 lists several manufacturers of
towers.
The most common ham tower is a welded lattice tower. It is built from 10-foot
sections of steel tubing and welded braces and you must guy or tie it to a sup­
porting structure, such as a house, at heights of 30 feet or more. A modest
concrete base of several cubic feet is required to provide a footing. Lattice
towers for amateur use are between 12 and 24 inches on a side and can be
used to construct towers well over 100 feet high. Lattice towers are suffi­
ciently strong to hold several large HF beam antennas, if properly guyed.

237

238 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Tilt-over towers are lattice towers hinged in the middle so that the top sec­
tions can pivot towards the ground using a winch. Because of mechanical
considerations, tilt-overs are limited to less than 100 feet in height.
Crank-up towers are constructed from telescoping tubing or lattice sections. A
hand-operated or motorized winch raises and lowers the tower with a cable
and pulley arrangement. A fully nested crank-up is usually 20 to 25 feet high,
reducing visual impact to the neighborhood, and you can climb it to work on
the antennas. Crank-ups also usually have a tilting base that aids in transport­
ing and erecting the tower. Crank-ups are unguyed and so depend on a mas­
sive concrete foundation of several cubic yards to keep their center-of-gravity
below ground level to prevent tipping over when fully extended. You can
install crank-ups in small areas where guying is not possible; they are avail­
able in heights of up to 90 feet.
Self-supporting towers are triangular in cross section, are constructed of trusslike sections like lattice towers, and rely on a large concrete base for centerof-gravity control. They are simpler and less-expensive than crank-ups.
Available at up to 100 feet, they have similar carrying capacity to lattice
towers. Mounting antennas along the length of a self-supporting tower is
more difficult than for a lattice tower with vertical supporting legs.

Table 12-5

Tower Manufacturers

Antenna

Web Site

U.S. Towers

Sold through
Ham Radio
Outlet

Rohn Industries*

www.rohnnet.
com/Index.
htm

Trylon

www.trylon.
com

Heights Tower

www.heights
towers.com

Universal Aluminum
Towers

Sold through
distributors

Lattice

Crank-Up

SelfSupporting

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

* Rohn was purchased by Radian, a Canadian company that plans on continuing to manufacture
tower components to the Rohn specifications. As of publication, it’s not clear if the Rohn name will
be used. Rohn towers have been a staple of ham radio antennas for decades and the Rohn brand
will still be around for a long time.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
Be extremely careful when buying a used tower or mast. Unless it has been in
storage, exposure to the elements can cause corrosion, weakening welds and
supporting members. If disassembled improperly, the tower can be damaged
in subtle ways difficult to detect in separate tower sections. A tower or mast
that has fallen is often warped, cracked, or otherwise unsafe. Have an expert
accompany you to evaluate the material before you buy.
You can construct self-supporting towers from unorthodox materials such as
telephone poles, light standards, well casing, and so on. If it can hold up an
antenna, rest assured that a ham has used it to do so at some time. The chal­
lenge is to transport and erect the mast, then climb it safely and create a
sturdy antenna mounting structure at the top.
Regardless of what you decide to use to hold up your antennas, hams have a
wealth of experience to share in forums such as the TowerTalk e-mail list. You
can sign up for TowerTalk at www.contesting.com. The topics discussed
range from mounting verticals on a rooftop, to which rope is best, to giant HF
beams, and how to locate True North. The list’s membership includes
experts who can handle some of the most difficult questions.

Is it a rotor or rotator?
A rotor is a part of a helicopter and has nothing whatever to do with ham
radio. A rotator, on the other hand, is a motorized gadget that sits on a tower
or mast and points antennas in different directions. Rotators are rated in
terms of wind load, which is measured in square feet of antenna surface. If
you decide on a rotatable antenna, you need to figure out its wind load in
order to determine the size rotator it requires. Wind load ratings for antennas
are available from the antenna manufacturer. The most popular rotators are
made by Hy-Gain (www.hy-gain.com) and Yaesu (www.yaesu.com).
You need to be sure that you can mount the rotator on your tower or mast;
some structures may need an adapter. Antennas mount on a pipe mast that
then sits in a mast clamp on top of the rotator. If you mount the rotator on a
mast, as on the left in Figure 12-5, you must mount the antenna at the top of
the rotator to minimize side loading. In a tower, the rotator is attached to a
rotator plate (a shelf inside the tower for the rotator to sit on) and the mast
extends through a sleeve or thrust bearing (a tube or collar that hold the mast
centered above the rotator), as at the center and right of Figure 12-5. Because
using a bearing in this way prevents any side loading of the rotator, you can
mount antennas well above the tower top if the mast is sufficiently strong.
An indicator assembly called a control box, which you install in the shack, con­
trols the rotator. The connection to the rotator is made with a multi-conductor
cable. Install the feedlines to the antennas in such a way so that they can
accommodate the rotation of the antennas and mast.

239

240 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Short "stub" mast
Antenna

Sleeve
bearing
(mast sits
on rotator)

Mast

Thrust
bearing
(holds mast)

rotates

Tower
Top
Section
Rotator

Figure 12-5:
Mounting a
rotator on a
mast and on
a tower.

stationary
Rotator
shelf

Clamp
Support
mast

Used rotators can be risky purchases. They are always installed in exposed
locations and wear out in ways not visible externally. Even if the rotator turns
properly on the bench, it may jam, stall, or slip when under a heavy load.
Either buy a new rotator or get a used one from a trusted source for your first
installation.

Radio accessories
You can buy or build hundreds of different gadgets to enhance whatever style
or specialty you choose. Here’s some information on the most common
accessories that you need to get the most out of your station.

Mikes, keys, and keyers
Most radios come with a hand microphone, although if you buy a used radio,
the hand mike may be long gone or somewhat worn. The manufacturersupplied hand mikes are pretty good and are all you need to get started.
After you operate for a while, you may decide to upgrade.

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
If you’re a ragchewer, some microphones are designed for audio fidelity with
a wide frequency response. Net operators and contesters like the hands-free
convenience of a headset with an attached boom mike held in front of your
mouth. Hand-held radios are more convenient to use with a combined
speaker-microphone combination accessory that plugs into your radio and
clips to a shirt pocket or collar. Your radio manufacturer may also offer a pre­
mium microphone as an option or accessory for your radio. Heil Sound
(www.heilsound.com) manufacturers a wide range of top-quality micro­
phones and headsets.
The frequency response of a microphone can make a big difference on the
air. If you operate under crowded conditions, the audio from a microphone
whose response emphasizes the mid-range and higher frequencies is more
likely to cut through the noise. Some microphones have selectable frequency
responses so that you can have a natural-sounding voice during a casual con­
tact, then switch to the brighter response for some DX-ing. If you’re not sure
which is best, ask the folks you contact or do an over-the-air check with a
friend who knows your voice.
Morse code enthusiasts have thousands of keys to choose from, spanning
over a century of history (see Chapter 10 for more info). Beginners often
start with a straight key and then graduate to an electronic keyer and a
paddle. If you think you’ll use CW a lot, I recommend going the keyer/paddle
route right away. Many rigs now include a keyer as a standard option. You
can plug the paddle into the radio and you’re on your way! CW operators
tend to find paddle choice very personal, so definitely try one out before you
buy. A hamfest often has one or more key-bug-paddle collectors and you can
try many different styles. The ham behind the table is likely to be full of good
information, as well.
If you decide on an external keyer, you can choose from kits and finished
models. Programmable memories are very handy for storing commonly sent
information, such as your call sign or a CQ message. Sometimes I put my
keyer in beacon mode to send a stored CQ message repeatedly to see if
anyone is listening on a dead band. (If everybody listens and nobody trans­
mits, the band sounds dead, but may be open to somewhere exciting.)
A number of computer programs send code from the keyboard. Browse to
www.ac6v.com/morseprograms.htm for an extensive listing of software.
What is a voice keyer? That sounds like an oxymoron! A voice keyer is a
device that can store short voice messages and play them back into your
radio as if you were speaking. Some are standalone units and some use a
sound card. Voice keyers are handy for contesting, DX-ing, calling CQ, and
so forth. Models also store both CW and voice messages, such as the MJF
Contest Keyer (www.mfjenterprises.com) and the Super Combo Keyer
(www.arraysolutions.com).

241

242 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Antenna tuners
While your new radio may be equipped with an antenna tuner, a number of
situations can occur in which you need an external unit. Internal tuners have
a somewhat limited range that fits many antennas. Antennas being used far
from their design or optimized frequency often present an impedance that
the rig’s tuner can’t handle. If balanced feedlines are used, you may need a
tuner that can handle the change from coaxial cable to open-wire feedlines.
Tuners are available in sizes from tiny, QRP-sized units to humongous, fullpower boxes larger than many radios. Table 12-6 lists a few of the manufac­
turers offering an assortment of tuners. If you decide to purchase a tuner,
choose one that’s rated comfortably in excess of the maximum power you
expect to use. I highly recommend getting one with the option to use bal­
anced feedlines. The ability to switch between different feedlines and an SWR
meter (which measures reflected RF power) are nice-to-have features.
They’re called “antenna tuners” but they don’t really “tune” an antenna at all!
A more accurate name for these gadgets is an impedance matcher. The imped­
ance matcher acts like an electrical gearbox to transform whatever imped­
ance exists at the end of the feedline to the 50 ohms radios like to see. Your
antenna doesn’t even know it’s there. This subject is discussed in detail in
both The ARRL Antenna Book and The ARRL Handbook. In addition, the online
article, “Do You Need an Antenna Tuner?” from QST, is online at www.arrl.
org/tis/info/tuner.html.

Table 12-6

Antenna Tuner Manufacturers
Balanced High-Power Automatic
Feedline (>300 watts) Tuning

Manufacturer

Web Site

MFJ

www.mfjenterprises.
com

Yes

Yes

Yes

Ameritron

www.ameritron.com

Yes

Yes

No

Vectronics

www.vectronics.com

Yes

Yes

No

LDG
Electronics

www.ldgelectonics.
com

External
balun
adapter

Yes

Yes

SGC

www.sgcworld.com

Yes

Yes

Yes

Alpha-Delta

www.alphadeltacom.
com

Yes

No

Yes

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Why is a rotator’s wind load rated in square feet?
A rotator’s job is to turn antennas and hold them
in place against the pressure of the wind. The
wind’s pressure tries to turn the antenna against
the rotator’s braking mechanism. The rotator
has to maintain control of the antenna when the
brake is off and the antenna is turning against
the wind. Both holding and turning the antenna
require the rotator to exert torque on the mast
that holds the antennas. As long as the rotator
can exert more torque than the wind on the

antenna, all is well. Torque caused by the wind
on the antenna is difficult to specify exactly, but
if a maximum wind speed is assumed, then
torque is directly related to antenna area, which
is easy to specify. Thus, rotators are rated in
square feet of wind load. If multiple antennas
are mounted on a single rotator, you must add
their individual wind loads together. Rotators for
amateur service are available with ratings start­
ing at 3 square feet.

Along with the tuner, you need a dummy load. The dummy load is a large
resistor that can dissipate the full power of your transmitter. The MFJ 260C
can dissipate 300 watts, which is adequate for HF transceivers. High-power
loads, such as the venerable Heathkit Cantenna or MFJ 250, immerse the
resistor in a cooling oil. The dummy load helps minimize your transmitter
causing interference during tune-up. HF dummy loads may not be suitable
for use at VHF or UHF, so check the frequency coverage specification before
you buy.

Computers in the Shack
As with just about every other activity, a computer can be involved. Ham
radio is no different and has embraced computers more intimately than in
most hobbies. Originally just used as a replacement for the paper logbook,
the computer has evolved nearly to the point of becoming a second op: con­
trolling radios, sending and receiving CW, and linking your shack to thou­
sands of others through the Internet.

PC or Mac or . . . ?
Most ham shack computers are Windows-based machinery. The vast majority
of software available for ham applications runs on the Win9x/2000/XP operat­
ing systems, with a healthy number of MS-DOS applications that run in MS­
DOS windows on Win9x/2000.

243

244 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Linux has an increasing number of adherents, particularly among the digital
mode enthusiasts. Here are a few Web sites that focus on Linux software:
 Hamsoft: radio.linux.org.au
 Terry Dawson VK2KTJ’s listing: www.radio.org/linux
 AC6V.com: www.ac6v.com/software.htm#LIN
 Tucson Amateur Packet Radio: www.tapr.org
The Macintosh computing community is making additional inroads to ham
radio software and programs are available for all of the common ham radio
uses available. The Ham-Mac mailing list is full of information for Mac fans
(mailman.qth.net/mailman/listinfo/ham-mac). You can find Macintosh
ham radio software at dogparksoftware.com and www.blackcatsystems.
com. A useful Web site that is devoted to bringing together Macintosh com­
puters and ham radio is www.machamradio.com.
Regardless of what platform and operating system you prefer, software tools
and programs are available to help you enjoy any type of operating you like.
While some software is supplied by commercial businesses, the amateur
community has developed an amazing amount of shareware and freeware.
Hams freely contribute their expertise in any number of ways, and develop­
ing software is a very popular activity.

Digital modes
Operation on most of the digital modes is rapidly converging on the sound
card as the standard device to send and receive data. With a simple audio
and transmit control interface, your computer and radio form a very power­
ful data terminal. Proprietary protocols, such as PACTOR II and Clover,
require special hardware and software available from the protocol developer.
I list specific software packages for the popular digital modes in Chapter 11.
MFJ Enterprises (www.mfjenterprises.com) and West Mountain Radio
(www.westmountainradio.com) both manufacture popular data interfaces.
If you choose to use an external multi-mode controller for the digital modes,
such as the Timewave PK232 or DSP599 (www.timewave.com), Kantronics KAM
(www.kantronics.com), or MFJ 1278B, you only need a terminal program,
such as Hyperterm, which is built into Windows, or Symantec’s Procomm-Plus
(www.symantec.com). Numerous other terminal programs are optimized for
ham radio digital data (which I list in Chapter 11).

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air

Radio control
Radios are now provided with an RS-232 control interface through which you
can monitor and control nearly every radio function. That flexibility has led
to a number of radio control programs that put the front panel on a com­
puter. Some radio manufacturers have a radio control package that you can
purchase or download with the radio. A number of third-party programs inte­
grate with logging software. If control interfaces are interesting to you, join a
user’s group for your radio on Usenet or via one of the ham radio portals (see
Chapter 3).

Hardware considerations
Outside of computation-intensive applications, such as antenna modeling or
high-performance data modems, you don’t need to own the latest and great­
est speed-demon computer. If you’re thinking about upgrading a home com­
puter, a computer that’s a couple of years old does just fine in the ham shack.
Furthermore, the flood of cheap, surplus computers available for a song
means that you can dedicate a computer to its own specific task, such as run­
ning a packet node or monitoring an APRS Web site, so as not to tie up your
main computer. Even a clunky old 486 DOS does just fine monitoring 1200­
baud packet data, for example.
If you decide to purchase a new computer for the shack, be aware that the
standard interface in ham radio for data and control is the RS-232 serial port.
These ports are being phased out on new computers in favor of USB 2.0.
(Serial ports are now referred to as legacy ports.) Integrating a USB-only PC
into the ham shack means that you either have to purchase a serial port
expansion card or use USB-to-RS-232 converters. The serial port expansion
cards likely have fewer compatibility and driver issues, but the USB convert­
ers are easier to install.
Computer RF interference can also be an issue in the ham shack. The two
main sources of interference are the monitor and data cables. If you have a
noisy monitor — one that emits a lot of RF energy — the interference can be
very tough to get rid of because shielding in monitors is almost non-existent.
Ferrite cores are available from RadioShack (part numbers 273-104 and
273-105) that you can place on cables to choke off the interfering signals.
Place the cores as close as possible to the connector on the device generat­
ing the interference. One core may be required at each end of the cable.
Ground the metal case of any computing equipment, as well.

245

246 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Buying New or Used Equipment
New equipment is always safest for a neophyte and it has that great new
radio smell, too! If the equipment doesn’t work, you have a service warranty
or the customer service representatives can help you out. Sales personnel
can help you with information about how to set up a radio or any accessories
and may even have technical bulletins or application guides for popular
activities. To find out where to buy new gear, get a copy of QST, CQ, or
WorldRadio. The major dealers all run ads every month and some are virtual
catalogs. For the smaller and local stores, check out the ARRL Technical
Information Service’s Web page at www.arrl.org/tis/tisfind.html.
While buying new equipment is safe, used gear is often an excellent bargain.
Hams always love a bargain. You can find nearly any imaginable piece of gear
with a little searching on a number of online swap sites, including eBay. (Look
for these sites through the portals and reflectors listed in Chapter 3.) I like to
buy and sell through the ham radio Web sites — my favorite is the Classified
pages on the eHam.net portal (www.eham.net/classifieds). The ARRL and
QRZ.com both have for-sale ads and quite a few other sites are springing up
all the time. Enter ham trade or ham swap into an Internet search engine. As
with shopping at hamfests, get help from an experienced friend before
buying.
What about buying through mail order? Internet and toll-free telephone num­
bers make shopping for rock-bottom prices easy, but shopping by mail order
has some drawbacks. The first is that you have to pay for shipping, which
could add tens of dollars to your purchase. You may also have to pay for
shipping to return equipment for service. Second, the local radio store is a
valuable resource for you. RadioShack probably doesn’t carry replacement
parts for your WhizBang2000 nor does it probably have a new battery pack
for that 10-Band PocketMaster. When you are stuck in the middle of an
antenna or construction project, you don’t want to have to stop and wait for
UPS to deliver materials. My advice: Buy some things through the mail and
some locally, balancing the need to save money against the need to support a
local store.

Upgrading Your Station
Soon enough, usually about five minutes after your first QSO, you start think­
ing about upgrading your station to hear better or be stronger. Keep in mind
the following tips when the urge to upgrade overcomes you. Remember the
old adage, “You can’t work ’em if you can’t hear ’em!”

Chapter 12: Getting on the Air
 The least expensive way to improve your transmit and receive capabili­
ties is with better antennas. Dollar for dollar, you get the most improve­
ment from an antenna upgrade. Raise them before making them larger.
 Only consider more power after you improve your antennas. Improve
your hearing before extending the range at which people can hear you!
An amplifier doesn’t help you hear better at all.
 Buying additional receiving filters for your radio is a whole lot cheaper
than a new radio.
 The easiest piece of equipment to upgrade in the station is the multi­
mode processor between your ears. Before deciding that you need a
new radio, be sure you know how to operate your old one to the best of
your abilities. Improving your knowledge is often the cheapest and most
effective improvement you can make.
By taking the improvement process one step at a time and by making sure
that you improve your own capabilities and understanding, you can achieve
your operating goals quicker and get much more enjoyment out of every ham
radio dollar.

247

248 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works

Chapter 13

Organizing Your Shack
In This Chapter
 Devising your ham shack layout
 Staying safe with RF and electrical currents
 Grounding your equipment

A

well-organized shack provides a number of benefits for the occasional
and serious ham enthusiast alike. You spend many hours in the shack,
so why not make the effort to make your experience as enjoyable as possible?
This chapter explains how to take care of the two most important inhabitants
of the shack — the gear and you. The order of priority is up to you.

Designing Your Ham Shack
One thing that you can count on is that your first station layout will prove to
be unsatisfactory. It’s guaranteed! Don’t bolt everything down right away.
Plan to change the layout several times as you change your operating style
and preferences.
You’ll spend a lot of time in your shack, no matter where it’s located, so
making the operating comfortable and efficient is important. By thinking
ahead, you can avoid some common pitfalls and save money, too!

Keeping a shack notebook
Before you unpack a single box or put up one shelf in your shack, you should
start a shack notebook to record how you put your station together and to
help you keep your station operating. The notebook can be a simple, spiralbound book of notepaper or a three-ring binder. A bound book has the advan­
tage that its pages can’t get blown out of the binder due to an unexpected
gust of wind.

250 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Sketch out your designs before you begin building, make lists of equipment
and accessories, and record the details as you go along. For example, if you
hook up two pieces of gear with multi-conductor cable, write down the color
of each wire and what it’s attached to. You won’t remember it later and the
written list saves you tons of time and frustration.
After you have the station working, keep track of the gear you add and how
you connect it. Record how your antennas work at different frequencies.
Write down the wiring diagram for the little gadgets and adapters. Don’t rely
on memory! Taking a few minutes to record information saves the time ten­
fold later.

Building in ergonomics
Spending hours in front of a radio or workbench is common, so you need to
have the very same concerns about ergonomics in your radio shack that you
do at work. You want to avoid awkward positions, too-low or too-high furni­
ture, and harsh lighting, to name just a few. By thinking about these things in
advance, you can avoid any number of personal irritations entirely!

The focal point
Remember your main goals for the station. Building a station for HF ragchewing
on phone, monitoring VHF FM repeaters, or using the digital modes requires a
different approach for each. Whatever you plan on doing, you probably use one
piece of equipment more than half the time. That equipment ought to be the
focal point of how you arrange your station. The focal point can be the radio, a
computer keyboard and monitor, or even a microphone or Morse code paddle.
Paying attention to how you use that specific item pays dividends in operating
comfort.

The computer
You may be building a radio station, but in many instances, you use your
computer more than the radio! Certainly, the monitor is the largest piece of
equipment at your operating position. Follow the guidelines for comfortable
computer users. Position the desktop at the right height for extended periods
of typing or, if possible, use a keyboard tray. Buy a high-quality monitor and
place it at a height and distance for relaxed viewing. Figure 13-1 shows a few
ways of integrating a monitor with radio gear.
Monitors mounted too far above the desk give you a sore neck. If you place
the monitor too far away, your eyes hurt. Placed too far to the left or right,
your back hurts. Now is the time to apply computer ergonomics and be sure
that you don’t build in aches and pains as the reward for the long hours you
spend at the radio.

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack
Neck is straight,
but not close to
radio

Good
compromise

Close to radio,
but low

Keyboard Tray

Figure 13-1:
Three
popular
arrange­
ments of
monitors
with radios.

The radio
Radios (and operators) come in all different shapes and sizes, which makes
giving hard and fast rules difficult. For example, HF operators tend to do a lot
of tuning, so placement of the radio is very important. VHF-FM operators do
less tuning, so the radio doesn’t have to be as close to the operator. Placing
your most-used radio off to one side of the keyboard or monitor probably is
the most comfortable. If you are right-handed, have your main radio on your
left and your mouse or trackball to the right. If left-handed, vice versa.
The larger radios usually have adjustable feet or a folding wire support called a bail.
The bail folds flat against the underside of the rig for transport. Adjust the bail or feet
to raise the front of the radio to a comfortable viewing angle. You should be able to
see all of the control labels without having to move your head up or down.

The operating chair
A key piece of support equipment, so to speak, is the operator’s chair. I am
always astounded to visit state-of-the-art radio stations and find a cheap,
wobbly, garage-sale office chair at the operating positions. Even though thou­
sands of dollars were spent on electronics, the operator doesn’t get the most
out of the radios because of the chair.

251

252 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
A good shack chair is a roll-around office style chair with good lower-back
support and plenty of padding in the seat. An adjustable model is best,
preferably one that you can adjust with levers while sitting down. You may
find that chairs with arms make sitting close to the operating desk difficult
without leaning on your arms or stressing your lower back. If possible,
remove the arms if you like sitting close to the operating table or desk.
The best shack chairs are the top-of-the-line secretarial models made for long
days of easy swiveling and rolling. You won’t regret spending a little extra on
the chair. Your body is in contact with your chair longer than any other piece
of equipment. You can find good bargains on used chairs at used office furni­
ture stores, listed in the Yellow Pages.

The desk and shelves
The top surface of your operating desk is the second-most contacted piece of
equipment. As is the case with chairs, many choices are available for desks
suitable for a ham shack. Consider height and depth when looking at desks.
Before choosing a desk, you need to decide if the radio sits on the desk or on
a shelf above it. Figure 13-2 illustrates the basic concerns. Do you like having
your keyboard on the desk? You need to be comfortable sitting at your desk
with your forearms resting comfortably on it. If you tune a radio a lot, such as
for most HF stations, avoid arrangements that cause your arm to rest on the
elbow or on the desk’s edge for prolonged periods. Nothing is more painful!
Make sure you have enough room for wrist support if using the keyboard is
your main activity.

Tilt radio up for visibility
and comfortable tuning

12“ min.
Good back
support

Figure 13-2:
The basic
consider­ 28-30“
ations for
shack desk
and chair.

Well-padded
seat

Feet can rest on
floor comfortably

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack
The most common height for desks is between 28 and 30 inches from the
floor. A depth of 30 inches is about the minimum if a typical transceiver that
requires frequent tuning or adjustment is sitting directly on it. You need at
least 12 inches between the front edge of the desk and the tuning knob. With
your hand on the most frequently used radio control, your entire forearm
needs to be on the desktop. If the radio is sitting on a shelf above the desk,
be sure that it’s close enough to you that tuning is comfortable and doesn’t
require a long reach. Be sure you can also see the controls clearly.
For small spaces, computer workstations may be a good solution. You proba­
bly have to add some shelves, but the main structure has all the right pieces
and may be adjustable, to boot. One drawback is that they don’t have much
depth for arm support, if your operating style requires it.

Ham shack examples
Because every station location and use is going to be different, I can’t provide
hard and fast rules with which everyone must comply. The most helpful guid­
ance I can provide is by way of example. Then you can decide what works for
you. The goal of this section is to get you thinking about what works for you,
not to suggest that you duplicate these stations exactly.
Paul Beringer NG7Z lives in a condominium where space is at a premium. He
likes low-power HF contesting and DX-ing. His simple station, shown in Figure
13-3, resides in a self-assembly computer workstation with a fold-down front
desk.
 The radio and accessories are stacked where Paul can easily see and
operate them.
 The fold-down surface provides enough desk surface for wrist support
when using a CW paddle.
 A slide-away drawer holds the computer keyboard and mouse below the
desk at a comfortable height.
 The monitor is close enough to be easy on the eyes and within a com­
fortable viewing angle of the radio.
 Lighting is from behind the operating position to avoid glare.
Many hams like a soft light in the shack because it is less distracting and
makes reading the indicators and displays on the radios and accessories
easier.
Jack W1WEF has a larger area available for his station, adding a second trans­
ceiver and an amplifier to the mix. Jack spends a lot of time on the bands as
you can tell from Figure 13-4. He often has two radios on at the same time.

253

254 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works

Figure 13-3:
Paul
Beringer
NG7Z has a
lot of
contacts in
his log from
this
compact
layout.

Figure 13-4:
Everything
in this
two-radio
station is
comfortably
within reach
of the
operator.

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack
 The computer monitor is right in the middle at a height that minimizes
head and eye movement between the radios and software.
 Shelves above the monitor hold accessories and equipment that require
few adjustments.
 Placing the amplifier on one side, antenna switches and rotators in the
middle, and the power supply and speaker on the right minimize confu­
sion and group similar controls together.
 Everything that requires frequent adjustment is within easy reach. No
side-to-side movement is required.
Put paper labels on the front panel tuning controls of an amplifier to make
changing frequencies easy without putting a powerful tune-up signal on the
air. Easily changing frequencies minimizes stress on the amplifier and inter­
ference to other stations.
I use a computer cart as the foundation for my station, shown in Figure 13-5.
I purchased a basic cart. Then I added plywood to extend the surface of the
shelves to either side. A vertical piece of plywood on the left-hand side pro­
vides a mounting surface for switches to change antennas. I added another
shelf at the cart’s base for the computer and power supplies. Because I do
almost all my work from the keyboard, it is at the most comfortable height
for me with the main radio right behind it for easy reach.

Figure 13-5:
I have a
rolling
computer
workstation
with some
added
plywood
shelves.

255

256 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
I placed the equipment that I don’t adjust as much, including antenna rota­
tors and VHF packet equipment, on a rolling cabinet to the left of the main
station. The advantage of the rolling platforms is that I can move them easily
to get access to the cables, something difficult to do with a fixed desk close
to the wall.

Mobile and portable station examples
Getting a good ham station installed in a car has never been easier! In the past
few years, manufacturers have taken the “all-band” radio design to new heights.
Take the Icom IC-706mkIIG (or IC-706) for example. A radio only 6.6" x 2.3" x 7.9"
and weighing only 5.5 pounds is capable of developing 100 watts output on all
amateur bands between 1.8 and 50 MHz, 50 watts on 144 MHz, and 20 watts on
432 MHz. This radio and similar offerings from other manufacturers have
changed mobile and portable operation forever.
The compact size of modern radios allows for very sleek installations in vehi­
cles. You can even place radios with detachable front panels in the trunk or
under a seat!
Dwayne Trego N8KDY took advantage of the space his unused ashtray was
occupying in his car’s dashboard. Removing the ashtray left plenty of room
for his VHF/UHF mobile rig as you can see in Figure 13-6. Better yet, he even
uses the ashtray cover to hide the rig when he’s not in the car! Unless you’re
a ham, you probably wouldn’t even notice the radio.
If you plan to operate from your RV, take a few pointers from the clean layout
in Figure 13-7 by Pete Wilson K4CAV. When Pete stops at a campground, he
sets up a station right at the driver’s position. Pete not only has his HF trans­
ceiver mounted right on the dashboard, but it’s sitting on top of a mobile
amplifier for an extra-powerful signal. When in motion, all of this gear is
safely stowed.
Poorly secured radio gear can be lethal in an accident. Please don’t go
mobile without making sure your radios are securely mounted. Take care to
keep cables and microphones away from air-bag deployment areas, as well.
Anything in motion inside the vehicle is a hazard to you and your passengers.
Maybe you’d like something less tied to an automobile or RV. Well, how about
a bicycle mobile station?
The bicycle mobile station, shown in Figure 13-8, is from Ben Schupack
NW7DX, who constructed it during his senior year of high school. Ben uses
a recumbent bike with an SGC-2020 HF QRP rig mounted on the handlebars.
A whip antenna and batteries are mounted behind the rider.

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack

Figure 13-6:
This clever
installation
replaces
the car’s
ashtray with
a VHF/UHF
mobile rig.

Ready for Operating

Figure 13-7:
Pete K4CAV
operates
right from
the driver’s
seat when
his RV is
parked.

Hidden by Ashtray Cover

257

258 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works

Figure 13-8:
Ben
Schupack
NW7DX
went for the
recumbent
look on
his twowheeler
setup.

Building in RF and Electrical Safety
Whatever type of station you choose to assemble, you must keep in mind
basic safety principles. Extensive literature is available for hams (see the side­
bar “Sources of RF and electrical safety information,” later in this chapter).
Don’t think that you can ignore safety in the ham shack. Sooner or later you
get bit and equipment is damaged or someone gets hurt. Take a little time to
review the safety fundamentals.

Basic safety
Safety is not particularly complicated. Mainly, being safe consists of consis­
tently observing just a few simple rules. These tips can keep you out of more
trouble than almost any others:
 Know the fundamental wiring rules for AC power. The National
Electrical Code (NEC) contains the rules and tables that help you do a
safe wiring job. The NEC, as well as numerous how-to and training refer­
ences, is available in your local library or at home improvement centers.
If you are unsure of your skills, hire an electrician.
 Deal with DC power, especially in a car, carefully to avoid shortcircuits and poor connections. Either situation can cause expensive
fires, and poor connections result in erratic operation of your radio.
As with AC power, read the safety literature or hire a professional
installer to do the job right.

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack
 Think of your own personal and family safety when constructing your
station. Don’t leave any kind of electrical circuit exposed where some­
one can touch it accidentally. Use a safety lockout (devices that prevent
a circuit breaker from being closed, energizing a circuit) on circuit break­
ers when you’re working on wiring or equipment. Have fire extinguishers
handy and in good working order. Show your family how to remove
power safely from the ham shack.

Lightning
The power of lightning and its destructive potential is awesome. If you live in
an area where lightning strikes are a possibility, take the necessary steps to
protect your station and home. These steps can be as simple as disconnecting
your antenna feedlines when not in use or you may decide to use professionallevel bonding and grounding. Whatever you choose, do the job diligently and
correctly.

RF exposure
Along with the possibilities of direct shocks due to contact with live electri­
cal circuits, the signals your transmitter generates are also hazardous. The
human body absorbs RF energy, turning it to heat. RF energy varies with fre­
quency, being most hazardous in the VHF and UHF regions. A microwave
oven operates at the high end of the UHF frequencies, for example.

Sources of RF and electrical safety information
Be responsible. Before you expose yourself
to danger, check out these inexpensive safety
references.

electrical-contractor.net/ESF/
Electrical_Safety_Forum.htm is a

 The American Radio Relay League (ARRL)
promotes safety for all manner of Amateur
Radio activities. You can find excellent dis­
cussions of ham shack hazards and how to
deal with them in the ARRL Handbook and
the ARRL Antenna Book. A downloadable
article is available in PDF format at www.
arrl.org/tis/info/pdf/AntBk.pdf.

 Brush up on lightning and grounding issues
in a series of Engineering Notes on the
Polyphaser Web site (www.polyphaser.
com). Click the Tech Info tab.

 For electrical safety issues relating to power
circuits, the Electrical Safety Forum at

good source of information.

 The ARRL publication RF Exposure and You,
the ARRL Handbook, and the ARRL Antenna
Book all discuss RF exposure safety issues.
The ARRL provides a series of articles and
guidelines covering all these safety issues at
www.arrl.org/tis/tismenu.html.

259

260 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Amateur signals are usually well below the threshold of any harmful effects,
but can be harmful when antennas focus the signal in such a way that you’re
exposed for a long period of time. High-power VHF and UHF amplifiers can
definitely be hazardous if you don’t handle them with caution.
A comprehensive set of RF Safety guidelines is available. As you construct
your own station, do a station evaluation to be sure you’re not causing any
hazards due to your transmissions. The Ham Radio For Dummies Web site
has a downloadable form and procedure for you to use in evaluating your
station’s RF safety.

First aid
Just like engaging in any other hobby that involves the potential for injury,
having some elementary skills in first aid is important. Have a first-aid kit in
your home or shack and be sure other family members know where it is and
how to use it. Training in first aid and CPR is always a good idea for you and
your family, regardless of your hobby.

Grounding Power and RF
Providing good grounding — for both AC and DC power as well as for the
radio signals — is very important for a trouble-free ham shack. Although
proper power grounding is fairly straightforward for AC and DC power,
grounding for the radio signals in a ham station is a different problem alto­
gether. You have to deal with both.

Grounding for AC and DC power
Most people hear the word ground and think, “connected to the Earth.” What
the term really means, though, is the lowest common voltage for all equipment.
For example, the Earth is at zero voltage for power systems. Grounding is really
the process of making sure different pieces of equipment have the same volt­
age reference.
In AC and DC power wiring, grounding provides safety by connecting exposed
conductors, such as equipment cases, either directly to the Earth or to a zerovoltage point, such as a building frame. Guiding any current away from you in
the event of a short circuit between the power source and the exposed conduc­
tors provides safety. By keeping all equipment at the same low voltage, no cur­
rent flows between pieces of equipment if they touch each other either directly
or if you touch both pieces simultaneously.

Chapter 13: Organizing Your Shack
Power safety grounding uses a dedicated conductor — the so-called “third
wire.” In the home, three-wire AC outlets connect the ground pin to the
home’s ground at the master circuit-breaker box. Because the frequency of
AC power is very low, the length of the ground wire doesn’t matter. It must
only be heavy enough to handle any possible fault currents.
In DC systems, because of the generally low voltages involved (less than 30
volts), power safety is less concerned with preventing shock than with mini­
mizing excessive current and poor connections. Both create a lot of heat and
are significant fire hazards. You must pay careful attention to conductor size
and keeping connections tight and clean. As with AC power grounds, the
length of the conductor is not an issue; only its current-carrying capacity.

Grounding for RF signals
The techniques that work for AC and DC power safety often do not work well
for the high frequencies that hams use. For RF, a wire doesn’t have to be very
long before it starts acting like an antenna or transmission line. For example,
at 28 MHz, an 8-foot piece of wire is about 1⁄ 4-wavelength long. It can have high
voltage on one end and very little voltage on the other!
Because constructing a wiring system that has one common low-voltage point
at RF for all the equipment is difficult, station builders use the more general def­
inition of grounding, keeping all equipment at the same voltage. You can create
an RF ground by using a single heavy wire or strap under or behind the equip­
ment and tying each piece of gear to it with a short piece of strap or copper
braid, as shown in Figure 13-9. Ham gear usually has a ground terminal just for
this purpose.
Copper strap is sold at hardware and roofing stores as flashing. Avoid paying
top dollar by finding a surplus metals dealer and poking around. A copper
strip or sheet is often available in a wide variety of gauges and sizes. I was
fortunate to find a heavy bar, predrilled with evenly spaced holes that made
a dandy ground bus (see Figure 13-10). Use your imagination — all you need
is material that is wide and is easy to make good electrical contacts with.
You don’t have to buy expensive braid if you have some lengths of old coax­
ial cable around. As long as the coax is not waterlogged or corroded, the
braid makes a fine ground strap. Lightly score the cable’s outer plastic jacket
and peel it off the cable. Push the ends of the braid sleeve together so that
it loosens slightly. By pushing the braid off the center insulation, you can
remove, flatten, and use it for grounding. The remaining wire is good highvoltage wire or you can use it for power supply applications.

261

262 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Radio

Power Supply
Accessory

Heavy strap
or braid

Copper strip or braid
Short pieces of braid or wire
PC
Figure 13-9:
Create
grounding
for RF
signals.

Figure 13-10:
A copper
ground bus
installed in
my shack.

Ground rod

Chapter 14

Housekeeping (Logs and QSLs)
In This Chapter
 Maintaining a log
 Picking out a QSL card
 Mailing QSL cards

B

efore you make any contacts with your new station, plan ahead for the
housekeeping chores that go with a new shack. For the ham, keeping a
log of station operations and sending QSLs for contacts are the paperwork
that finishes the job. In this chapter, I show you what to put in your log and
how to put together a QSL card.

Keeping a Log
Keeping a detailed log is no longer a requirement, but a lot of good reasons
exist to keep track of what you do on the ham bands. The main log is a nice
complement to the shack notebook (see Chapter 13), and you’ll find it valu­
able in troubleshooting efforts and equipment evaluation.

Updating your little black radio book
Your station log can literally be a notebook or binder with handwritten
entries for every contact. (Figure 14-1 shows a typical format for paper log­
books.) Be sure to record the basics:
 Time: Hams keep time in UTC (or World Time) for everything but local
contacts and radiogram identification (see Chapter 10).
 Frequency: Just recording the band in either MHz or wavelength is suffi­
cient (for example, 20-meters or 14 MHz).
 Call sign: Record each station you contact.

264 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Record year somewhere on each sheet
Watts assumed

Figure 14-1:
A typical
paper
logsheet
showing
the basic
information.

Use UTC!

RST optional

QSL sent & received

DATE

FREQ

MODE

POWER

TIME

STATION
WORKED

REPORT
SENT REC'D

TIME
OFF

3 Nov

20 m

USB

100

1431

G3SXW

58

57

1437 Roger, funny chap

1438

OKIRI

57

58

1442

DL6FBL

59

57

nr Munich, Ben

x

1515

V5IAS

59

59

Namibia, Ralph direct

x

1538

A6IAJ

59

59

UAE

2000

N7UK

-

-

0225

N7FL

-

-

100

0330

K8CC

57

55

4 Nov 146.82

8 Nov

40 m

FM

LSB

25

QTH

COMMENTS
QSL
QSL VIA S R
NAME

Jiri

Ali

x

K2UO x

ARES net

0224

Debbie, needs battery
Lots of
QRN

MI

Dave

3.985

LSB

100

0405

W7EMD

59

57

WA Emergency Net

9 Nov 10.124

PSK

100

0445

N7FSP

gud

OK

nice copy tonight

Band or frequency OK

x

Can be used for any information about the QSO

Those three pieces of information are enough to establish the who, when, and
where of ham radio. Beyond the basics, you probably want to keep track of the
mode you used, the signal report you gave and received, and any personal
information about the other operator.
Don’t limit yourself to just exchanging the information recorded in your log­
book or logging program. Another person is on the other end of the QSO with
lots of interesting things to say!

Keeping your log on a computer
If you’re an active ham, I highly recommend keeping your log on a computer.
The logging program makes looking up previous contacts with a station or
operator easy. You can also use your logging program like a Web blog as a dayto-day radio diary to keep track of local weather, solar and ionospheric condi­
tions, equipment performance, and behavior. The programs can also export
data in standard file formats such as ADIF (Automated Data Interchange
Format). For mobile or portable operation, portable logging programs, such
as GOLog (home.earthlink.net/%7Egolog/), run on a
Palm-OS PDA.

Chapter 14: Housekeeping (Logs and QSLs)

Selecting a QSL Card
QSL cards are the size of a standard postcard featuring an attractive graphic
or photo with the station’s call sign. Information about a contact is written on
one side. The QSL is then mailed directly to the other station or through an
intermediary as described below. One of my favorite activities, exchanging
QSL cards allows you to claim credit for contacts in order to receive awards,
but most hams just do it for fun.
You can find many varieties of QSLs, but three very basic rules can help make
the exchange as quick and error-free as possible. Figure 14-2 illustrates the
following:
 Have your call sign and QSO information on one side so that the receiver
doesn’t have to look for it.
 Print your call sign and all contact information in a clear and easy-toread typeface.
 Beyond your mailing address, make sure the physical location of the
station is shown, including county (for U.S. stations) and four-digit grid
square.

Figure 14-2:
My club’s
QSL card.

265

266 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
You can find advertisements for QSL printers in the classified section of ham
magazines or you can roll your own card with a laser or inkjet printer.
Follow these suggestions for sure-fire accuracy:
 Double check the date and time of your contact. Date and time are
frequent sources of error. Start by making sure your own clock is set
properly. Use UTC or World Time for every QSL except those for local
contacts.
 Use an unambiguous format for date. Is 5/7/99 May 7th or July 5th?
The date is crystal clear if you show the month with a Roman numeral,
as in 7/V/99, or spell the month out as in 5 Jul 99.
 Use heavy black or blue ink pen that won’t fade over time like colored
inks. Never use pencil.

Sending and Receiving QSLs
After you fill out your QSLs, then what? Depending on where the cards are
going, you have several options that trade postage expense against turn­
around time. By following the appropriate rules for each method, you can
get a high return rate for your cards.

QSL-ing direct
The quickest (and most expensive) option for sending QSLs is to send the
cards direct, meaning directly to other hams at their published addresses.
This method ensures your card gets to the recipient faster than any other
method and usually results in the shortest turnaround time. Include the
return postage and maybe even a SASE (self-addressed, stamped envelope).
This method costs more for you, but makes things as easy as possible for the
other ham to get a return card on its way.
Postal larceny is generally not a problem in the wealthier industrialized coun­
tries, but it is an enormous problem elsewhere. An active station can make
hundreds of contacts per week, attracting unwelcome attention when many
envelopes start showing up with those funny number-letter call sign things.
Don’t put any station call signs on the envelope if you have any question
about the reliability of the postal service. Make your envelope as ordinary
and as thin as possible.

Chapter 14: Housekeeping (Logs and QSLs)

Sending via managers
To avoid poor postal systems and cut postage expenses, many DX stations
and nearly all DX-peditions use a QSL manager. The manager is typically in a
country with good postal service and the return rate is nearly 100 percent.
QSL-ing via a manager is just like QSL-ing direct. If you don’t include return
postage and an envelope to a manager for a DX station, you’ll likely get your
card back via the QSL bureau (see the next section), which takes a while.
Managers can be located by a QSL manager Web site such as www.qslinfo.
de or www.eham.net. The DX newsletters listed in Appendix B are also good
sources of information.
If you send your QSL overseas, be sure to do the following:
 Use the correct Global Air Mail Letter Post rate from the U.S. Post Office
Web site (www.usps.com/common/category/postage.htm).
 Ensure air mail service with an Air Mail sticker (free at the post office),
an air mail envelope, or an Air Mail/Par Avion ink stamp on the envelope.
 Include return postage from sources such as William Plum DX Supplies
(e-mail Bill at plumdx@msn.com) or the K3FN Air Mail Postage Service
(users.net1plus.com/ryoung/index.htm).
An International Reply Coupon or IRC is redeemable for one unit of
unregistered air mail postage. You can purchase IRCs at the post office
or redeem one from overseas. If the clerk is not familiar with IRCs, sec­
tion 372.1 of the USPS manual explains how to handle IRCs.
You’ll hear “send 1 (or 2) greenstamps” for return postage. A greenstamp is a
$1 bill. Take care that currency is not visible through the envelope. In some
countries, non-domestic currency is illegal, so check before sending it
through the mail.

Bureaus and QSL services
All that postage can mount up pretty quickly. A much cheaper (but slower)
option exists: the QSL bureau system. You should use this method when the
DX station says, “QSL via the bureau” or on CW, “QSL VIA BURO.” The QSL
bureau system operates as a sort of ham radio post office, which allows hams
to exchange QSLs at a fraction of the cost of direct mail.
Bundle up all of your DX QSLs (you still have to send domestic cards directly)
and send them to the Outgoing QSL Bureau. There the QSLs are sorted and

267

268 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
sent in bulk to the Incoming QSL Bureaus around the world. The cards are then
sorted and distributed to individual stations. The recipients then reciprocate
and send reply cards back in the other direction. Go to www.arrl.org/qsl/
for more details. To get your cards, you must keep postage and envelopes in
stock at the Incoming QSL Bureau. Then, when you least expect it, a fat pack­
age of cards comes in the mail. What fun!
An intermediate route is the WF5E QSL Service (www.qsl.net/wf5e/), which
forwards QSLs to foreign and U.S. managers at the cost of a dollar for a few
cards. You send outbound cards directly to WF5E and your return cards come
through the bureau system. Compared to direct mail, the WF5E QSL Service is
still a good bargain.

QSL-ing electronically
Hey, this is the twenty-first century, isn’t it? Why aren’t hams sending QSLs
electronically? Well, some hams are, although it’s relatively new. Hams
exchange cards on two different sites: eQSL and the ARRL’s Logbook of the
World (LOTW).
eQSL (www.eqsl.net/qslcard/) was the first electronic QSL system and is
extremely easy to use. Its site has a tutorial slideshow that explains just how
the eQSL works and how to use it.
The ARRL’s LOTW (www.arrl.org/lotw/) is a little more complicated to use.
You’re required to provide proof of license and your identity in order to receive
a digital signature certificate. (For information about how digital signatures work,
look up references on Public Key Infrastructure technology.) The digital sig­
nature authenticates your contact information. LOTW does not generate or
handle physical QSL cards; it only provides verification of QSOs for award
purposes.

Chapter 15

Hands-On Radio
In This Chapter
 Acquiring tools and components
 Maintaining your station
 Troubleshooting
 Repairing your equipment
 Building equipment yourself

H

am radio is a lot more fun if you know how your radio works. You don’t
have to be an electrical engineer or a whiz-bang programmer, but to
keep things running smoothly and deal with the inevitable hiccups, you need
a variety of simple skills. As you tackle them, you’ll find that you’re having
fewer problems, getting on the air more, and having better luck making con­
tacts. Trying new modes or bands will also be much easier for you.

To help you get comfortable with the hands-on part of ham radio, this chap­
ter provides some guidance in the three parts of keeping a ham radio station
on the air: making sure your radio doesn’t break, figuring out what is broken
when it does, and fixing the broken part.
Before delving into the insides of your equipment, please take a minute and
visit Chapter 13. Ham radio is a hobby, but electricity doesn’t know that. I’d
like to keep all of my readers for a long, long time, so follow one of ham
radio’s oldest rules, “Safety First!”

Acquiring Tools and Components
In order to take care of your radio station, you’ll need to have some basic
tools. It doesn’t take a chest of exotic tools and racks of parts. In fact, you
probably have most of the tools already. How many you need is really a
question of how deeply you plan on delving into the electronics of the hobby.

270 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
You have the opportunity to do two levels of work: maintenance and repair
or building.

Maintenance tools
Maintenance involves taking care of all your equipment, as well as being able
to fabricate any necessary cables or fixtures to put it all together. Figure 15-1
shows a good set of maintenance tools. Having them on hand allows you to
do almost any electronics maintenance task.
 Wire cutters: Use a heavy-duty pair to handle big wire and cable, and a
very sharp pair of diagonal cutters, or dikes, with pointed ends to handle
the small jobs.
 Soldering iron and gun: You need a model with adjustable temperature
and interchangeable tips. Delicate connectors and printed-circuit boards
need a low-temperature, fine-point tip. Heavier wiring jobs take more
heat and a bigger tip. The soldering gun should have at least 100 watts
of power for antenna and cable soldering. Don’t try to use a soldering
gun on small jobs.
 Terminal crimpers: Regular pliers on crimp terminals don’t do the job;
the connection pulls out or works loose and you spend hours chasing
down the loose connections. Learn how to install crimp terminals and
do it right the first time with the right tools.
 Head-mounted magnifier: Electronic components are getting smaller
by the hour, so do your eyes a favor. Magnifiers are often available at
craft stores. You can also find clamp-mounted swing-arm magnifier-light
combinations.
 Volt-ohmmeter (VOM): If you can afford it, get one with diode and transis­
tor checking, a continuity tester, and maybe a capacitor and inductance
checker. Some models also include a frequency counter, which can come
in handy.
You also need to have spare parts on hand. Start by having a spare for all
your equipment’s connectors. Look over each piece of gear and note what
type of connector is required. When you’re done, head down to the local elec­
tronics emporium and pick up one or two of each type. To make up coaxial
cables, you need to have a few RF connectors on hand of the common types:
UHF, BNC, and N.
You often need adapters when you don’t have just the right cable or a new
accessory has a different type of connector. Table 15-1 shows the most
common adapter types. You don’t have to get them all at once, but this list
is good to have at a hamfest or to use when you need an extra part to make
up a minimum order.

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
Headmount Magnifier
Volt-Ohmmeter

Soldering Iron and Tips

Figure 15-1:
A set of
tools
needed for
routine ham
shack main­
tenance.

Terminal Crimper
Small Screwdrivers

Large Screwdrivers
Heavy Cutters

Needlenose Pliers and Diagonal Cutters

Table 15-1

Common Shack Adapters

Adapter Use Common Types
Audio

Mono to stereo phone plug (1⁄ 4-inch and 1⁄ 8-inch), 1⁄ 4-inch to 1⁄ 8-inch
phone plug, right-angle phone plug, phone plug to RCA (phono) jack
and vice versa, RCA double-female for splices

Data

9-pin to 25-pin D-type, DIN-to-D cables, null modem cables and
adapters, 9-pin and 25-pin double male/female (gender benders)

RF

Double-female (barrel) adapters for all three types of connectors,
BNC plug to UHF jack (SO-239) and vice versa, N plug to UHF jack and
vice versa

What are the differences between plugs, jacks, sockets, males, and females? A
plug is the connector that goes on the end of a cable. A jack is the connector
that’s mounted on equipment. A male connector is one in which the signal
contacts are exposed pins (disregard the outer shroud or shell). A female
connector has recessed sockets that accept male connector pins.

271

272 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Along with adapters and spare parts, you should have on hand some
common consumable parts:
 Fuses: Have spares for all of the fuse sizes and styles your equipment
uses. Never replace a fuse with a higher value fuse.
 Electrical tape: Use high-quality tape such as Scotch 33+ for important
jobs, such as outdoor connector sealing, and get the cheap stuff for tem­
porary or throwaway jobs.
 Fasteners: Purchase a parts-cabinet assortment with #4 through #10
screws, nuts, and lockwashers. Some equipment may require the smaller
metric-sized fasteners. You need 1⁄ 4-inch and 5⁄16-inch hardware for anten­
nas and masts.
 Interference suppressors: Having a couple of filters and ferrite cores
around allows you to address interference problems quickly.
Cleaning equipment is an important part of maintenance and you need the
following items:
 Soft bristle brushes: Old paint brushes (small ones) and toothbrushes
are great cleaning tools. I also keep a round brush for getting inside
tubes and holes.
 Metal bristle brushes: Light duty steel and brass brushes clean up oxide
and corrosion. Brass brushes do not scratch metal connectors, but do
damage plastic knobs or displays. Don’t forget to clean a brush of corro­
sion or grease after the job.
 Solvents and sprays: I have a bottle or can of lighter fluid, isopropyl
alcohol, contact cleaner, and compressed air. Lighter fluid cleans panels
and cabinets gently and quickly, as well as removes old adhesive and
tape. Always test a solvent on a hidden part of a plastic piece before
applying a larger quantity.

Repairing and building tools
Figure 15-2 shows additional hand tools that you need when you begin doing
your own repair work or building equipment. (I don’t show the larger tools,
such as drills and bench vises.)
Repairing and building go beyond maintenance in that you work with metal
and plastic materials. You also need some additional specialty tools and
instruments for making adjustments and measurements:
 Wattmeter or SWR meter: When troubleshooting a transmitter, you
need an independent power measurement device. Many inexpensive
models work fairly well (stay away from those in the CB shops; they

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
often are not calibrated properly when used away from CB frequencies),
but the Bird Model 43 is the gold standard in ham radio. Different ele­
ments, or slugs, are used at different power levels and frequencies. You
can find both used meters and elements.
 RF and audio generators and oscilloscope: While you can do a lot with
DC tests and a voltmeter, radio is mostly about AC signals. To work with
AC signals, you need a means to generate and view them. If you’re seri­
ous about getting started in electronics, go to the ARRL Web site (www.
arrl.org/tis/info/HTML/Hands-On-Radio/) to find out how to pur­
chase ’scopes and generators.
 Nibbling tool and chassis punch: Starting with a round hole, the nibbler
is a hand-operated punch that bites out a small rectangle of sheet metal
or plastic. Use a nibbler to make a large rectangular or irregular opening
and then file the hole to shape. The chassis punch makes a clean hole in
up to 1⁄ 8-inch aluminum or 20-gauge steel. These are not cheap, but if you
plan on building regularly, the time savings and quality improvements
are enormous.
 T-handled reamer and countersink: The reamer allows you to enlarge a
small hole to a precise fit. A countersink quickly smoothes a drilled
hole’s edges and removes burrs.

Machinist's Vise
Wattmeter

Nibbling Tool

Reamer

Figure 15-2:
Use these
tools in
building or
repairing
electronic
equipment.

Needle Files
Nutdrivers

Awl

Alignment Tool

Rule
Countersink

Allen Wrenches

Tinsnips

273

274 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Drilling a hole in a panel or chassis that already has wiring or electronics
mounted on or near it takes special measures. You must prevent metal chips
from falling into the equipment and keep the drill from penetrating too far. To
control chips, put a few layers of masking tape on the side of the panel where
you are drilling with the outer layers kept loose to act as a safety net. To keep
a drill bit from punching down into the wiring, use a small piece of hollow
tubing that exposes just enough bit to penetrate all the way through.

Components for repairs and building
I find myself using the same components in the following list for most building
and repair projects. Stock up on these and you’ll always have what you need:
 Resistors: Various values of 5-percent metal- or carbon-film, 1⁄ 4- and
1
⁄ 2-watt fixed-value resistors; 100, 500, 1k, 5k, 10k, and 100k ohm variable
resistors and controls
 Capacitors: 0.001, 0.01, and 0.1 µF ceramic; 1, 10, and 100 µF tantalum or
electrolytic; 1000 and 10000 µF electrolytic; miscellaneous values
between 220 and 10000 pF film or ceramic
 Inductors: 1, 10, and 100 mH chokes
 Semiconductors: 1N4148, 1N4001, 1N4007, and full-wave bridge recti­
fiers; 2N2222, 2N3904, and 2N3906 switching transistors; 2N7000 and
IRF510 FETs; red and green LEDs
 ICs: 7805, 7812, 7912, 78L05, and 78L12 voltage regulators; LM741,
LM358, and LM324 op-amps; LM555 timer; LM386 audio amplifier;
MAX232 RS232 interface
Although having a completely stocked shop is nice, you’ll find that building
up the kinds of components you need takes time. Rather than give you a huge
shopping list, here are some guidelines to follow:
 When you buy or order components for a project, order extras. The
smaller components, such as resistors, capacitors, transistors, and
diodes, are often cheaper if you buy in quantities of ten or more. After a
few projects, you have a nice collection.
 Hamfests are excellent sources of parts and component bargains.
Switches and other complex parts are particularly good deals. Parts draw­
ers and cabinets often come with parts in them and you can use both!
 Broken appliances and entertainment devices around the home are
worth stripping before throwing out. Power cords and transformers,
headphone and speaker jacks, switches, and lots and lots of interesting
hardware otherwise end up in the dump. Plus, seeing how they’re made
is interesting.

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
 Build up a hardware junk box by tossing in any loose screws, nuts,
spacers, springs, and so on. Use an old paint tray or a flat, open tray to
make rooting through the heap easy in search of a certain part. The junk
box can be a real timesaver.

Maintaining Your Station
The best thing you can do for your station is to spend a little time doing regu­
lar maintenance. It works for cars, checkbooks, and relationships, so why not
ham radio?
Be sure to keep a station notebook (see Chapter 13). The station notebook is
a cheap and effective substitute for the frailties of human memory. Open the
notebook whenever you add a piece of equipment, wire a gadget, note a prob­
lem, or fix a problem. Over time, the notebook helps you avoid or solve prob­
lems, but only if you keep it up to date.
You also need to set aside a little time on a regular basis to inspect, test, and
check the individual components that make up the station. Along with the
equipment, this includes the cables, power supplies, wires, ropes, masts, and
everything else between the operator and the ionosphere. Check them when
you plan to be off the air so that you don’t have to do a panic fix when you
want to be on the air. All the equipment and antennas in the world are of no
use if they’re not working.
You can make routine maintenance easy with a checklist. Start with the fol­
lowing list and customize it for your station:
 Check all RF cables, connectors, switches, and grounds: Make sure all
connectors are tight because thermal cycling can work them loose.
Rotate switches or cycle relays to keep contacts clean and turn up prob­
lems. Look for kinks in or damage to feedlines. Be sure that ground con­
nections are snug.
 Test transmitters and amplifiers for full power output on all bands:
Also double-check your antennas and RF cabling. Use full power output
to check all bands for RF feedback or pickup on microphones, keying
lines, or control signals.
 Check received noise level (too high or too low) on all bands: The
noise level is a good indication of whether feedlines are in good shape, if
preamps are working, or if you have a new noise source to worry about.
 Check SWR on all antennas: Be especially vigilant for changes in the fre­
quency of minimum SWR, which can indicate connection problems or
water getting into the antenna. Sudden changes in SWR (up or down)

275

276 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
mean tuning or feedline problems. SWR is discussed in Chapter 12 and
in the technical content on the Ham Radio For Dummies Web site.
 Inspect all antennas and outside feedlines: Use a pair of binoculars or
climb up and check. You’re looking for loose connections; unraveling
tape, ties, or twists; damage to cable jackets; and that sort of thing.
 Inspect ropes and guys: Get in the habit of checking for tightness and
wear whenever you walk by. A branch rubbing on a rope can eventually
cause a break. Knots can come loose.
 Inspect masts, towers, and antenna mounts: The time to find problems
is well before the weather turns bad. Use a wrench to check tower and
clamp bolts and nuts. Fight rust with a cold galvanizing paint. After the
winter, check again for weather damage.
 Vacuum and clean the operating table and equipment; clear away
loose papers and magazines. Sneak those coffee cups back to the
kitchen and recycle the old soft drink cans. Make sure all fans and venti­
lation holes are clean and not blocked.
I realize that you may not want to haul the vacuum cleaner into the radio
shack, but it may be the most valuable piece of maintenance gear you have.
Heat is the mortal enemy of electronic components and leads to more failures
than any other cause. The dust and crud that settles on radio equipment
restricts air flow and acts as an insulator against heat dissipation. High voltage
circuits, such as in an amplifier or computer monitor, attract dust like crazy.
Vacuuming removes the dust, wire bits, paper scraps, and other junk so they
can’t cause expensive trouble.
As you complete your maintenance, note whether anything needs fixing or
replacing and why, if you know. You will probably get some ideas about
improvements or additions to the station, so note those, too.
Over time you will notice that some things regularly need work. In my station,
because I have moveable desks, the ground connections need constant atten­
tion. After I noted regular trouble with a solid strap, I replaced it with a piece
of braid and haven’t had any more trouble. Regular maintenance uncovered
the problem and I fixed it before I had an interference or feedback problem.
If you do routine maintenance three or four times a year, you can dramati­
cally reduce the number of unpleasant surprises you receive.

Overall Troubleshooting Tips
No matter how well you do maintenance, something eventually breaks or
fails. Finding the problem quickly is the hallmark of a master, but you can
become a good troubleshooter by remembering a few simple rules:

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
 Try not to jump to conclusions. Work through the problem in an orderly
fashion. Write your thoughts down to help focus.
 Start at the big picture and work your way down to the equipment
level.
 Avoid making assumptions. Check out everything possible for yourself.
 Read the equipment manual. The manufacturer knows the equipment
best.
 Consult your station notebook. Look for recent changes or prior
instances of related behavior.
 Write down any changes or adjustments while troubleshooting so you
can reverse them later. You may not remember everything that you did.

Troubleshooting Your Station
Your station is a collection of equipment (including antennas) connected
together. To operate properly, each piece of equipment expects certain condi­
tions to be met at each of its connectors and controls. You can trace many
station problems to violations of those conditions, often without using any
test equipment more sophisticated than a voltmeter. The problem usually is
either the equipment or the connection.
Most station problems fall into two categories: RF and operational. RF prob­
lems are things such as high SWR, no signals, and reports of poor signal
quality. Operational problems include not turning on (or off) properly, not
keying (or keying inappropriately), or no communications between pieces of
equipment.
Start by assigning the problem to one of these categories. (You may be wrong,
but you have to start somewhere.)

RF problems
Some RF problems occur when RF is not going to where it’s supposed to go.
These problems are generally a bad or missing cable, connector, or switching
device (a switch or relay) that needs to be replaced. Try fixing these problems
with the following suggestions:
 Replace cables and adapters if you have spares you know work.
 Note which combinations of switching devices and antennas seem to
work and which don’t. See if the problem is common to a set or piece of
equipment or specific cables.

277

278 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
 Temporarily jumper around or bypass switches, relays, or filters. If the
jumper is not obvious, leave a note so you don’t forget about it.
 Check through antenna feedlines. Take into account whether the
antenna feedpoint has a DC connection across it, such as a tuning network
or impedance matching transformer. Gamma-matched Yagi beams show
an open circuit while beta-matched Yagis and quad loops have a few ohms
of resistance across the feedpoint. (Note: Recording the normal value of
such resistances in the station notebook for comparison when trouble­
shooting is a good idea.)
 Troubleshoot test equipment using the receiver’s noise. Disconnecting
and reconnecting antenna cables causes changes in the noise level.
Other problems you may come across include hot microphones and equip­
ment enclosures, or interference to computers or accessories. (You haven’t
fully lived until you get a little RF burn on your lip from a metal microphone
case!) Usually you can fix these problems with a little grounding. Try these
suggestions:
 Double-check to ensure the equipment is grounded to the station RF
ground bus. The equipment may be grounded, but double-checking
never hurts.
 Check the shield connections on audio or control cables. These cables
are often fragile and might break when flexed or yanked. (You never yank
cables, do you?)
 Try different grounding connections or coil up an excessively long
cable.
 Add ferrite RF suppression cores or beads to the cables to equipment
you can’t ground. For more on this, skip ahead to the “Ferrites as RFI
suppressors” sidebar.
On the higher HF bands, particularly 21, 24, and 28 MHz, connections begin to
look like antennas as their lengths exceed 1⁄ 8 of a wavelength. For example, a
6-foot serial cable is about 3⁄ 16 wavelengths long on 28 MHz and has a sizeable
RF voltage at the midpoint, even though both ends are grounded! If you have
RF pickup problems on just one band, try attaching a 1⁄ 4 wavelength counter­
poise wire to move the RF hot spot away from the equipment in question. A
quarter-wave conductor open-circuited at one end can look short-circuited at
the other. Like balancing a tire with weights, attaching the counterpoise to
the enclosure of the affected equipment may lower the RF voltage enough to
reduce or eliminate the interference. Keep the wire insulated and away from
people and equipment at the open end.

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio

Operational problems
Operational problems fall into three categories: power, data, and control.
After you determine which type of problem you have, you often come very
close to the cause of the problem.

Power problems
Power problems can be obvious (no power), spectacular (high voltage power
supply failure), or subtle (AC ripple, slightly low or high voltage, or poor con­
nections). The key is to never take power for granted. Just because the power
supply light is on doesn’t mean the output is at the right voltage. I have wasted
a lot of time due to not checking power and now I always check the power
supply voltages first. Try these solutions to fix your power problems:
 Check to see if the problem is caused by the equipment, not the power
supply. You can easily isolate obvious and spectacular failures, but don’t
just swap in another supply until you’re sure that the problem is in fact
the power supply. Connecting a power supply to a shorted cable or input
can quickly destroy the supply’s output circuits. If a circuit-breaker or
fuse keeps opening, don’t jumper it. Find the reason it’s doing so.
 Check for low output voltage. Low voltage can cause all sorts of strange
behavior by radios. The microprocessor may not function correctly, lead­
ing to bizarre displays, loss of external control, and incorrect response to
controls. Low voltage can also result in low power output or poor RF sta­
bility (chirpy, drifting, or raspy signals).
 Check the supply with both AC and DC meter ranges. Hum on your
signal can mean a failing power supply or battery. A DC voltmeter check
may be just fine, but less than 100 mV of AC needs to be on the power
supply output.
 If you suspect a poor connection, measure voltage at the load (for
example, the radio) and work your way back to the supply. Poor con­
nections in a cable or connector cause the voltage to drop under load.
They can be difficult to isolate because they’re only a problem with high
current, such as when transmitting. Voltage may be fine when you
receive. Excessive indicator light dimming is a sure indicator of poor
connections or a failing power supply.
Working on AC line-powered and 50-volt or higher supplies can be dangerous.
Follow safety rules and get help if you need it.

279

280 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Data problems
Data problems are more and more common around modern radio shacks.
Interfaces between computers, radios, and data controllers are usually made
with RS-232 connections. If you installed new equipment and can’t get it to
play with your other equipment, three common culprits are to blame:
 Baud rate: An improper baud rate (or the data framing parameters of
start bits, stop bits, and parity) renders links inoperative, even if the
wiring is correct. Baud rate specifies how fast data is sent. The framing
parameters specify the format for each byte of data. These may be set as
part of a software interface or by switches in an accessory.
 Protocol errors: Protocol errors are generally a mismatch in equipment
type or version. A PC using the Kenwood radio control protocol can’t
control a Yaesu or Ten-Tec radio, for example. Be sure all the equipment
involved can actually use the same protocol or is specified for use with
the exact models you have.
 Improper wiring configuration: Read the operating manuals for both
pieces of equipment and be sure that you connect any required control
signals properly. The cables may require jumpering pins at either or
both ends. A common cable configuration, called a null modem, con­
nects all RS-232 output signals to their companion input. You can make
or buy null-modem cables or use a straight-through cable (pin 1 con­
nected to pin 1, pin 2 to pin 2, and so on) and use a null-modem adapter
at one end of the link.
RS-232 connections come in three common configurations. Three-wire config­
urations have Receive Data (RxD), Transmit Data (TxD), and ground — the
software takes care of controlling the data flow. Five-wire configurations
require RxD, TxD, ground, and Request to Send (RTS) and Clear to Send (CTS)
control lines. The control lines implement hardware handshaking to control
the data flow. If its control lines aren’t configured properly, an output port
won’t send data. Seven-wire configurations add Data Terminal Ready (DTR)
and Data Set Ready (DSR). You may also encounter Carrier Detect (CD) in
packet data systems, indicating whether the channel is busy.
If you suddenly experience a failure in equipment that was communicating
properly before, you may have a loose cable or the configuration of the soft­
ware on one end of the link may have changed. Double-check the communica­
tions settings and swap cables.
You have a lot of options in wiring up an RS-232 link. Luckily, radio and acces­
sory manufacturers generally don’t get too fancy with the cabling, but you do
need to read the manuals. If you’d like to know more about RS-232 interfaces,
the tutorial at www.data-com-experts.com/RS232_Data_Interface_
tutorial.html has a lot of useful information and connector wiring diagrams.

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
A breakout box, shown in Figure 15-3, is an invaluable tool for troubleshooting
serial data connections. It allows you to monitor the status of all data and
control lines. You can disconnect lines and jumper pins, as well. With a break­
out box, determining if you have transmit and receive lines swapped or a con­
trol signal misrouted is easy. Less capable, but handy, are RS-232 status
testers that show the state of each of several commonly used lines. Both are
available from Jameco Electronics (www.jameco.com) and similar vendors.
New computers, as of early 2004, often have only USB or FireWire serial data
ports. But the serial data interface standard in the radio shack is RS-232. You
have two solutions: Install a multi-port RS-232 interface board in the com­
puter or use USB-to-RS-232 adapters. Both require you to install drivers in
your operating system. The interface boards tend to be the most compatible
with radio gear. USB adapters convert the data twice (once between RS-232
and USB and then once between USB and the computer host), which leads to
more opportunity for incompatibility. If you go the USB route, I suggest
checking with the radio or accessory vendor for recommended adapters.

Jumper pins together

9-to-25 pin adapter

Male 25-pin D-connector

Figure 15-3:
A breakout
box allows
you to view
status and
change
configura­
tions of
serial data
links.

Female 25-pin D-connector
One test pin for each connector pin

Wire jumpers

281

282 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Control problems
Control problems are caused by either the infamous pilot error (in other
words, you) or actual control input errors.
Pilot error is the easiest, but most embarrassing, to fix. With all the buttons
and switches in the shack, I’m amazed I don’t have more problems. Follow
these steps to fix your error:
1. Check that all of the operating controls are set properly.
Bumping or mistakenly moving a control is easy. Refer to the operator’s
manual for a list of settings for the various modes. Try doing a controlby-control setup and don’t forget controls on the back panel or under an
access panel.
Speaking from hard personal experience, before you decide that a radio
needs to go to the shop, check every control on the front panel, especially
squelch (which can mute the audio unexpectedly), MOX (which turns
the transmitter on all the time), and Receive Antenna (which makes the
receiver sound dead if no receive antenna is attached). If you are really
desperate, most radios have the capability of performing a hard reset,
which restores all factory default settings but also wipes out the memory
settings.
2. Disconnect every cable from the radio one at a time, except for power
and the antenna.
Start with the cable that contains signals related to the problem. If the
behavior changes for any of the cables, dig into the manual to find out
what that cable does. Could any of the signals in that cable cause the
problem? Check the cable with an ohmmeter, especially for intermittent
shorts or connections, by wiggling the connector while watching
the meter.
3. If the equipment is not responding to a control input, such as keying
or PTT, then you need to simulate the control signal.
Most control signals are switch or contact closures between a connector
pin and either ground or 12V. You can easily simulate a switch closure
with . . . a switch! Replace the control cable with a spare, but unwired
connector and use a test lead (wires with small clips on each end) to
jumper the pin to the proper voltage. You may want to solder a small
switch to the connector with short wires if the pins are close together.
Manually make the connection and see if the equipment responds prop­
erly. If so, something is wrong in the cable or device generating the
signal. If not, the problem is in the equipment you are testing.
At this point, you’ll probably have isolated the problem to a specific piece
of equipment, where your electronic skills can take over. You now have a deci­
sion to make. If you are experienced in electronics and have the necessary

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
information about the equipment (schematic and operating manual), then by
all means go ahead with your repairs. Otherwise, proceed with caution!

Troubleshooting Your Home
and Neighborhood
If you have problems outside of your shack, they usually consist of the dreaded
RF Interference (RFI), as in “I can hear you on my telephone!” or “My garage
door is going up and down!” Lesser known, but just as irritating, is the manbites-dog situation — your station receives interference from some other elec­
tric or electronic device. Solving these problems can lead you through some
real Sherlock Holmes-ian detective work.
Start by browsing the ARRL RFI Information page located at www2.arrl.org/
tis/info/rfigen.html. For in-depth information, including diagrams and
how-to instructions, read a copy of The ARRL RFI Book, which covers every
common interference problem. Your club library may have a copy. Consult
your club experts for assistance. Occasional interference problems are a fact
of life in this modern era and you’re not the only one to experience them.
Use the experience and resources of others to help you out!

Dealing with interference
to other equipment
Start by making your own home interference free. Unless you are a low-power
VHF/UHF operator, you likely own at least one appliance that reacts to your
transmissions by buzzing, humming, clicking, or doing its best duck imitation
along with your speech. It’s acting like a very unselective AM receiver and
your strong signal is being converted to audio, just like the old crystal radio
sets did. It’s not the ham radio’s fault — the appliance is failing to reject your
signal — but it’s still annoying.
Your goal is to keep your signal out of the appliance so that it doesn’t receive
the signal. Sounds simple, doesn’t it? Start by removing all accessory cords
and wires to see if the problem goes away. If it does, put the cords and wires
back one at a time to see which one is acting as the antenna. Power cords
and speaker leads are very good antennas and often conduct the RF into the
appliance. Wind candidate cables onto a ferrite interference suppression core
(RadioShack 273-104 and 273-105) close to the appliance and see if that cures
the problem. You may have to core all the leads, although generally just one or
two are sensitive. RadioShack also sells AC power cord filters (part number
15-1111) that may help.

283

284 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Part 15 devices
Unlicensed devices that use RF signals to oper­
ate or communicate are subject to the FCC’s
Part 15 rules. These rules include cordless
phones, wireless modems or headsets, garage
door openers, and other such devices. Devices
that may radiate RF signals unintentionally, such
as computers and video games, are also sub­
ject to Part 15 rules. The rules make a tradeoff:
The device owners don’t need a license to oper­
ate the cordless phone, but are required not to

interfere with and to accept any interference
from a properly operating licensed service,
such as Amateur Radio. This agreement gener­
ally works pretty well, except in the strongtransmitter/sensitive-receiver environment of a
ham radio station. See the extensive discussion
of Part 15 rules on the ARRL RFI Web site
(www2.arrl.org/tis/info/rfigen.html)
for more details.

If the device is battery-powered and doesn’t have any leads, you probably
can’t fix the problem, I’m sorry to say. You have to either replace the device
or get along with the interference. The manufacturer’s Web site may have
some interference cures, or you may find some guidance from the ham radio
Web sites or club members. Try entering the model number of the appliance
and interference into a search engine to see what turns up.
The following common devices are often victims of interference:
 Cordless telephones: Those that use 47 MHz frequencies are often dev­
astatingly sensitive to strong out-of-band signals. Luckily, these phones
are being replaced with models that use 900 MHz and 2.4 GHz radio links.
These newer models are much less sensitive to your RF. If you come up
against one of the 47 MHz units, just replace it with a newer one.
 Touch lamps: These accursed devices respond to nearly any strong
signal on any frequency. You can try ferrite cores on the power cord, but
results are definitely mixed. Internal modifications are described on the
ARRL RFI Web site. Replacing the lamp may be the easiest option.
 TVs and VCRs: The usual point of entry for unwanted RF is through the
VHF/UHF cable input. The sensitive tuners are easily overloaded. If the
interference is from an HF signal, a high-pass filter often does the job.
RadioShack 15-579 is an inexpensive filter that I use successfully. Cable
installations may have loose connections that allow ham signals to leak
in. The usual symptom is interference with cable channel 18 when trans­
mitting on the 2-meter band. Have the cable company check and tighten
the connections.

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
 Alarm systems: The many feet of wire strung around the house to the
various sensors and switches make a dandy antenna. Unfortunately, the
system controller sometimes confuses the RF they pick up for a sensor
trip. System installers have factory-recommended interference suppres­
sion kits that take care of most problems.
By practicing on your own home electronics, you gain valuable experience in
diagnosing and fixing interference problems. Also, if a neighbor has problems,
you’re prepared to deal with the issue. See the sidebar “Part 15 devices,” in
this chapter.

Dealing with interference
to your equipment
You find two types of likely interference to you: electric and electronic.
Electric noise is caused primarily by arcing in power lines or equipment,
such as motors, heaters, and electric fences. Electronic noise is caused
by leaking RF signals from consumer appliances and computers operating
nearby or from nearby transmitters. Each has a distinctive signature or char­
acteristic sound. The following list describes the signatures of common
sources of electric noise:
 Power line: Steady or intermittent buzzing at 60 or 120 Hz; weather may
affect interference.
Power line noise is caused by arcing or corona discharge. Arcing can
occur around or even inside cracked or dirty insulators. It can also
occur when two wires rub together, such as a neutral and ground wire.
Corona discharge occurs at high-voltage points on sharp objects where
the air molecules become ionized and electricity leaks into the atmos­
phere. The interference is a buzzing noise because the arc or discharge
occurs at the peaks of the 60 Hz waveform, which occur at 120 Hz.
Do not attempt to fix problems with power lines. Always call your power
company.
You can assist the power company by locating the faulty equipment. You
can track down the noise source with a battery-powered AM radio or
VHF/UHF hand-held radio with an AM mode (aircraft band works well). If
you have a rotatable antenna at home, use it to pinpoint the direction of
the noise. (The null off the side of a beam antenna is sharper than the
peak of the pattern.) Walk or drive along the power lines in that direc­
tion to see if you can find a location where the noise peaks. I have found
several power poles with bad hardware by driving around with the car’s

285

286 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
AM radio tuned between stations. If you do find a suspect pole, write
down any identifying numbers on the pole. Several numbers for the dif­
ferent companies that use the pole may be on it; write them all down.
Contact your utility and ask to report interference. You can find a great
deal more information about this process on the ARRL RFI Web page.
 Industrial equipment: Sounds like power line noise, but with a more reg­
ular pattern, such as the case with motors or heaters that operate on a
cycle. Examples in the home include vacuum cleaners, furnace fans, and
sewing machines.
 Defective contacts: Failing thermostats or switches carrying heavy loads
emit highly erratic buzzing and rasping noise. These problems are signifi­
cant fire hazards in the home and you need to fix them immediately.
 Dimmers and speed controls: Low-level noise like power lines that comes
and goes as you use lights or motors.
 Automotive ignition noise: Buzzing that varies with engine speed, which
is caused by arcing in the ignition system.
 Electric fences: Regular pop-pop-pop noises at about one second inter­
vals. A defective charger can cause these problems, but the noise is usu­
ally due to broken or missing insulators or arcing from the fence wires to
weeds, brush, or ground.

Ferrites as RFI suppressors
Ferrite is a magnetic ceramic material that is
used as a core in RF inductors and transform­
ers. It’s formed into rods, toroid cores (circular
and rectangular rings), and beads (small toroids
made to slip over wires). Ferrite has good mag­
netic characteristics at RF and is made in dif­
ferent formulations, called mixes, that optimize
it for different frequency ranges. For example,
Amidon ferrites made of Type 73 material work
best at HF and Type 43 ferrites work best at VHF.
Preventing RFI (RF interference) often means
preventing unwanted RF current flow. Inductors
have an increasing reactance (resistance to AC
current) with frequency, so placing an inductor
at the right spot can do the job. Forming the wire
or cable into a coil does make an inductor, but
getting enough inductance can mean making
a sizeable coil, particularly below 10 MHz.

Winding the wire on a ferrite core or using a fer­
rite bead can create sufficient inductance in a
very small volume.
Because of their small size, you can place fer­
rite cores and beads very close to the point at
which an undesired signal is getting into or out
of a piece of equipment. Beads are designed to
slip over wires and cables. To create more
inductance, use more beads. You can secure
them on the cable with a plastic cable-tie, tape,
or heat-shrink tubing. Cores are wound with
several turns of the wire or cable. This tech­
nique works particularly well with telephone
and power cords. Split cores come with a plas­
tic cover that holds the core together, which
makes placing the core on a cable or winding
turns easy if the cable already has a large con­
nector installed.

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
Finding an in-home source of electric noise depends on whether the device
is in your home or a neighbor’s. Tracking down in-home sources can be as
simple as recognizing the pattern when the noise is present and correlating it
to an appliance. You can also turn off your home’s circuit breakers one at a
time to find the circuit powering the device. Then check each device on that
circuit.
If the noise is coming from outside your home, you have to identify the direc­
tion and then start walking or driving with a portable receiver. Review the
ARRL RFI Web site or reference texts for information about how to proceed
when the interfering device is on someone else’s property.
What about electronic noise? No problem! The following list describes the
signatures of common sources of electronic noise:
 Computers or microprocessor-controlled games, entertainment sys­
tems, and appliances: These produce steady or warbling tones on a
single frequency, strongest on HF, but you can also hear them through
VHF and UHF.
 Cable and power-line modems: You hear steady or warbling tones or
hissing/rasping on the HF bands.
 Cable TV leakage: Heard at VHF and UHF, buzzing (video signal) or
audio FM signal with program content. That TV may also experience
interference from you on that cable channel.
 Broadcast interference: A steady AM signal with programming or bursts
of speech or data interference is caused by overload of your receiver or
by spurious signals generated from strong signals mixing together, and
occasionally a spurious output from the broadcast transmitter itself.
Each type of electronic interference has its own set of techniques for finding
the source and stopping the unwanted transmission. You are most likely to
receive interference from devices in your own home or close by, because the
signals are weak. If you are sure that the source is not on your property, you
need a portable receiver that can hear the interfering signal.
The ARRL RFI Web site has some helpful hints on each type of interference as
well as guidance on how to diplomatically approach the problem (because
it’s not your device). The ARRL RFI Web site’s Overview page contains excel­
lent material on helping you deal with and manage interference complaints
(both by you and from others). ARRL members have the resources of the
League’s Technical Coordinators and technical information services, as well.
You can completely eliminate or reduce most types of interference to insignif­
icant levels with careful investigative work and application of the proper
interference suppression techniques. The important thing is to keep frustra­
tion in check and work the problem through.

287

288 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works
Building Equipment from a Kit
Building your own gear — even just a simple speaker switch — is a great ham
tradition. By putting equipment together yourself, you become familiar with
the operation, repair, and maintenance of your existing equipment.
If you’re just getting started in electronics, I recommend that you start your
building adventures with kits. When I got started, you could find Heathkit in
every ham shack. Today, kits are available from many sources, such as
Ramsey, Ten-Tec, Vectronics, RadioShack, and others. You can find numerous
kit vendors on the ARRL Technical Information Service Web page (www.arrl.
org/tis/) by clicking the TISfind link and entering Kit in the Search box.
Choose the simpler kits until you are confident of your technique. Kits are a
great budget-saving way to add test instruments to your workbench and vari­
ous gadgets to your radio station. Not only that, but you don’t have to do the
metal work and the finished result looks great, too! After you build a few kits,
you’ll be ready to move on up to building a complete radio. Although the
Elecraft K2 (www.elecraft.com) is the top-of-the-line radio kit available
today, numerous smaller QRP radio kits are available from other vendors.
You can build most kits using just the maintenance tool kit. Concentrate on
advancing your soldering skills. Strive to make the completed kit look like a
master built it and take pride in the quality of your work. Read the manual
and use the schematic to understand how the kit works. Observe how the kit
is put together mechanically, particularly the front panel displays and
controls.

Building Equipment from Scratch
Building something by starting with a blank piece of paper or a magazine arti­
cle and then putting it to use in your own station is a real thrill. Building from
scratch is not too different from building a kit . . . except that you have to
make your own kit. Your first project should be a copy of a circuit in a maga­
zine or handbook — one that is known to work and gives directions on how
to assemble and test it. If a blank printed circuit board (or PCB) is available,
I recommend ordering one.
Imagine that you have to make a kit for someone else based on the instruc­
tions, schematic, and list of components. Photocopy the article and highlight
all of the instructions. If an assembly drawing is included, enlarge it for guid­
ance. Make extra copies so you can mark them up as you go. Read the article
carefully to identify any critical steps. When you get your components
together, sort them by type and value and place them in jars or an old muffin

Chapter 15: Hands-On Radio
pan. Keep a notebook handy so that you can take notes for later use. As you
build and test the unit and finally put it to use, everything is completely
documented.
If you choose to design a circuit from scratch, I salute you! Documenting your
work in a notebook is even more important to a project that starts with design.
Take care to make your schematics complete and well-labeled. Record what­
ever calculations you must make so that if you have to revisit some part of the
design later, you have a record of how you arrived at the original values. With
digital cameras in abundance, take a few photos along the way at important
milestones of construction. After you finish, record any tests that you make
to verify that the equipment works.
Don’t let failure get you down! The first cut at designs hardly ever work out
exactly right and sometimes you even wind up letting all of the smoke out of
a component or two! If a design doesn’t work, figure out why and then move
on to the next version. Don’t be afraid to ask for help or try a different angle.
Ham radio isn’t a job, so keep things fun . . . after all, it’s amateur radio!

289

290 Part IV: Building and Operating a Station That Works

Part V

The Part of Tens

I

In this part . . .

n this part, I dispense more ham wisdom, ten tips at a
time. I start with ten things I wish I’d known when I
started in ham radio. Then I part the curtains of mystery
and blab out ten secrets of the masters. Consider each
one a coupon good for one helping of pure ham radio
enjoyment!

Chapter 16

Ten Secrets for Beginners
In This Chapter
 Tips for improvement
 Ways for newbies to expand their proficiencies and build confidence

I

n this chapter, I present ten fundamental truths that can help even the
rankest beginner keep the wheels turning during those first forays into
ham radio. Keep these tips in mind and you’ll be on your way to veteran
status in no time.

Listening, Listening, Listening
Listening is the most powerful and important way to learn. Listen to the suc­
cessful stations to learn their techniques. Listening to on-the-air contacts is
called reading the mail. All ham communications are open and public — they
can’t be encrypted or obscured. Just turn on the radio and get a real-time
seminar in any facet of ham radio communication techniques you care to try.

Buddying Up
Find a friend who is learning the ropes like you are. Is there someone from
your licensing class or club also getting started? Meet on the air and get used
to using your equipment together. The best part is sharing in each other’s
successes!

Knowing Your Equipment
Hams joke about never reading the owner’s manual, but don’t believe it. Hams
need to know their equipment. If a demo or tutorial is available to you, go

294 Part V: The Part of Tens
through it. Practice adjusting the main controls or settings to observe the
effects. Acquire at least a passing familiarity with even the most obscure con­
trols. Keep the manual handy for quick reference, too.

Following the Manufacturer’s
Recommendations
The manufacturers want you to get the best performance and satisfaction out
of their equipment, don’t they? That’s why they have recommended settings
and procedures. Follow them until you are comfortable enough to optimize
performance on your own.

Trying Different Things
Don’t feel like you have to stay with one mode or band or magazine or radio.
Changing your mind and striking out in a different direction is okay. As you
become more comfortable with ham radio, feel free to dabble in anything that
catches your fancy. Sooner or later, you’ll discover something that makes you
want to dive in deeply.

Nobody Knows Everything
Surround yourself with handbooks and how-to articles, magazines, Web sites,
manuals, and catalogs. Use any reference available. If you’re confused or not
getting the results you expect, ask someone at a club meeting, on the air, or
in an Internet forum for help. The oldest tradition in ham radio is hams giving
other hams a hand. We’re amateurs! We like to do it! Someone helped us, and
we’ll help you.

Practicing Courtesy
Behind every receiver is a person just like you. Polite terms like “Please,”
“Thanks,” “Excuse me,” and “Sorry” work just as well on the air as they do in
person. Listen before transmitting and be flexible. If you encounter a rude
operator, just go somewhere else or find something else to do — don’t let
tempers escalate on the air.

Chapter 16: Ten Secrets for Beginners

Joining In
By definition, ham radio isn’t a solitary activity. Ham radio is a lot more fun if
you have some regular acquaintances. Being welcomed on the air into a round­
table QSO or a local weather net is great. Ham radio welcomes kings and pau­
pers equally and we’re all on a first-name basis. The ham bands are your home.

Getting Right Back in the Saddle
So what if you called CQ and nobody responded? So what if you put up a new
antenna and it didn’t work? Get right back in the saddle and try again. I don’t
know of any ham who has instant success right off the bat, so don’t get dis­
couraged and give up. You worked too hard to get that license!

Relax, It’s a Hobby!
I know the scary feeling of thinking every ham is listening whenever you get
on the air. Hey, relax and don’t worry about a mistake putting you on a hobbywide blacklist. If you try something new and it doesn’t work out, that’s okay.
Everybody fumbles now and then. Keep ham radio fun for yourself and do
things you enjoy.

295

296 Part V: The Part of Tens

Chapter 17

Ten Secrets of the Masters
In This Chapter
 Time-tested tips for newbies and masters alike
 Methods of honing your expertise

S

urely, the grizzled veterans have stores of secret knowledge that take
years and years to learn and make them the masters of all they survey?
Certainly they have their experiences and expertise, but down deep, you can
find they rely on simple principles that work in many different situations. You
can use them, too!

Listening, Listening, Listening
The masters get more out of listening than anyone because they have learned
how to listen. Every minute you spend listening is a minute learning and a
minute closer to being a master.

Learning What’s Under the Hood
Operating a radio and building an efficient and effective station are so much
easier if you know how the equipment works. Even if you’re not terribly techsavvy, take the time to learn the basics of electronics and how your equipment
functions. A master understands the effects of controls and adjustments.

Reading History
An appreciation of the rich history of ham radio helps you understand how
the hobby has shaped itself. Ham radio is full of conventions and methods
developed over time, many of which can seem at first confusing and obscure.
Master these conventions by understanding how they came about.

298 Part V: The Part of Tens
Having a Sharp Axe
When asked what he would do if given eight hours to cut down a tree, Abe
Lincoln replied that he would spend the first six hours sharpening his axe.
Masters keep their equipment and skills sharp. When they’re needed on the
air, they’re ready.

Practicing Makes Perfect
Even a sharp axe gets dull over time. A master is on the air regularly, keeping
in tune with conditions. A master knows who is active, from where, and when.
Make operating your radio station a natural and comfortable activity by keep­
ing yourself in shape with regular radio exercise.

Paying Attention to Detail
Masters know that the little things are what make the difference between 100­
percent and 90-percent performance or even between being on and off the air.
Waterproofing that connector completely or having your CQ sound just right
really pays off in the long run. And masters are on the radio for the long run.

The Problem Ain’t What You Don’t Know
It’s what you do know that ain’t so! (Will Rogers) If you guess wrong, don’t be
too proud to admit it. Learn the right way or correct fact. The worst mistakes
are made by ignoring the truth. A master isn’t afraid to say those three dreaded
words, “I don’t know!”

Antennas Make the Difference
If you look at the top stations in any facet of ham radio, you’ll find that their
owners spend the most time and effort on the antenna systems. You’ll find no
better return on investment in ham radio than in improving your antennas.
Masters are often antenna and feedline gurus.

Chapter 17: Ten Secrets of the Masters

A Decibel Is a Decibel Is a Decibel
Masters know that any improvement in the path between operators is not to be
discounted. Anything that makes your signal easier to understand — one deci­
bel less noise received, one decibel better audio quality, one decibel stronger
transmitted signal — makes holding the contact easier.

Ham Radio Is a Lifetime of Learning
Take advantage of every learning opportunity, including learning from your
mistakes . . . you’ll have plenty! A master knows that each problem or goof is
also a lesson. Masters get to be masters by starting as raw recruits just like
you and then making one improvement at a time, day in and day out.

299

300 Part V: The Part of Tens

Chapter 18

Ten First Station Tips
In This Chapter
 Avoiding mistakes in the creation of your first station
 Saving money on equipment

W

hen you’re putting your first station together — whether at home,
mobile, portable, or even just a hand-held radio — getting sidetracked
and creating problems later is easy. Avoid common pitfalls by applying the
simple tips I give in this chapter. That way, you won’t scratch your head later,
thinking, “Why did I do that?”

Being Flexible
Don’t assume that you’ll be doing the same activities on the air forever. Avoid
over-specialized gear except where required for a specific type of operating.
Make use of the flexibility of a computer and software to implement functions
that are likely to change, such as a digital signal. Don’t nail everything down:
Allow equipment to be moved around for comfort and layout convenience.
The built-in look is attractive, but very hard to change later.

Looking and Learning
Browse the Web and read articles that show how other stations are put
together. Make note of any particularly good ideas. Don’t hesitate to write or
e-mail the station owners to ask questions — they welcome your attention
and interest. Take advantage of opportunities to visit local stations, too.

302 Part V: The Part of Tens
Don’t Put All Your Eggs in One Basket
Spending a lot of money on a radio right away is tempting, but you’ll find your­
self needing other gear, such as antennas and cables, that you perhaps hadn’t
counted on. Those extras can add up to at least as much as your main radio, so
leave yourself some budget for them, too.

Used-Equipment Bargains
If you have a knowledgeable friend who can help you separate the wheat from
the chaff, used equipment is a great way to get started. By saving money, you
have more cash for exploring new modes and bands later on. It’s caveat emptor,
though: You can easily encounter junk equipment. If in doubt, or if the deal
seems too good to be true, pass it up.

Building Something!
Using equipment you build yourself is a thrill. Your skills benefit from small
construction projects such as audio switches, filters, or keyers. Buying every­
thing new is generally less trouble, but the equipment is expensive, too. Build­
ing some things yourself can save you some money. Don’t be afraid to get out
the drill and soldering iron. You can find lots of kits, magazines, and handbook
articles to get you started.

Being Well-Grounded
Don’t neglect grounding. Put in a ground system (see Chapter 13) as the first
step — adding grounding after the equipment and wires are already in place is
much harder. Good grounding helps you avoid RF feedback and ground loops
later, both frustrating and aggravating problems.

Chapter 18: Ten First Station Tips

Saving Money by Building
Your Own Cables
You need lots of cables and connectors in your station. At a cost of roughly
$5 or more for each pre-made cable, you can quickly spend as much on con­
necting your equipment as you can on a major accessory. Learn how to install
connectors well and you save many, many dollars over the course of your
ham career.

Building Step-by-Step
After you have the basics of your shack in place, you can upgrade your equip­
ment in steps so that you can always hear a little farther than you can transmit.
Don’t be an alligator (all mouth, no ears)! Plan ahead with a goal in mind so that
your ham radio dollars and hours all work to further that goal.

Finding the Weakest Link
Every station has a weakest link. Always be on the lookout for a probable
point of failure or of loss of quality. On the airwaves, you’ll encounter stations
with muffled or distorted audio that have a multi-kilobuck radio but a cheap,
garage-sale microphone. Use quality gear and keep heavily-used equipment
well-maintained.

Being Comfortable
You’re going to spend a lot of hours in front of your radio so take care of the
operator, too. Start with a comfortable chair — excellent chairs are often avail­
able in used office furniture stores at far below new cost. Make sure you have
adequate lighting and that the operating desk is at a comfortable height. Those
dollars will pay dividends every time you sit down!

303

304 Part V: The Part of Tens

Chapter 19

Ten Easy Ways to Have
Fun on the Radio
In This Chapter
 Tips to help you break out of your routine
 Contests and events

S

o you’re sitting there saying, “There’s nothing to do!” Don’t worry!
Everybody gets in a bit of a rut now and then. In this chapter, I give you
ten great ideas to shake off the radio blues and spice up your operating.

Listening for People Having
Fun and Joining In
Sounds simple, doesn’t it? Just turn on the radio and start tuning the bands.
Join a ragchew, check into a net, monitor a slow-scan transmission, listen for
someone calling “CQ Contest,” or find a pileup and dive in. On any given day,
literally hundreds of different activities are taking place and all you need to
do to participate is to just spin the tuning dial and pay attention.

Special Events and Contests
Are Looking for You!
Every weekend, you can find little pockets of activity sprinkled around the HF
and VHF bands as contests and special event stations take to the airwaves.
Nearly every contest is open to the casual passer-by. The operators involved

306 Part V: The Part of Tens
welcome your call and help you exchange the necessary information. You can
contact special event stations and often have beautiful, interesting certificates
for contacts.

Making Up Your Own Contest
Get together with your friends or club and dream up a silly competition just
for fun. Buy an old bowling trophy and make up a challenge to go with it. See
who can contact the most states in a weekend. Play radio bingo. Tune up and
down the band with a friend and see who can make contacts with the lowest
power. Go nuts, it’s a hobby!

Sending a Radiogram, Ma’am
Who is on your “I should write” list? Maybe a relative or friend would enjoy get­
ting a short radiogram for a birthday or just to say hello. Look up the NTS local
nets in your neighborhood, fill out the radiogram form, and jump in. Warning:
It’s addictive!

Joining the Parade
Every town has public events such as parades, festivals, sports, and concerts
that make use of hams to assist them with communications and other elec­
tronics chores. You’ll feel great after giving these folks a hand and they will
have an appreciation of ham radio, too. Contact your ARRL Section Manager
for information about how to get in touch with organizers or ham public ser­
vice groups.

Going Somewhere Cool
For a real treat, try mobile or portable operation from some unusual place. On
HF, try operating from a rural county or county line on the County Hunters Net.
On VHF and UHF, with a short drive, you can be in a sought-after grid square.
The nearest hilltop or scenic overlook can generate hours of fun. Take a photo
and make up a neat QSL card to go with the contacts!

Chapter 19: Ten Easy Ways to Have Fun on the Radio

Squirting a Bird
Making contacts through a satellite (squirting a bird) is a lot easier than you
think. Try the FM repeater or packet satellites for starters. Monitor the Inter­
national Space Station and Space Shuttle downlink frequencies. You’ll receive
an interesting certificate just for reporting that you heard either one. Watching
their reflections move across the sky at dusk or dawn will never be the same
after you make contact with them.

Learning a New Lingo
Brush up those high-school foreign language skills and make contact with a
DX station. If you’re equipped for HF, you can talk to them directly. Chapter 9
explains how to make VHF/UHF contacts via repeaters using IrLP or one of the
other linking systems. Ham radio makes learning a new language easy. Just
learn a few new words at a time, and soon you have a whole new vocabulary
and a DX friend or two, to boot.

Shortwave Listening (SWL-ing)
What’s on the frequencies between the HF ham bands? Most radios now have
general-coverage receivers that tune all frequencies, so why not tune in the
German national broadcaster Deutsche Welle or HCJB from Quito, Ecuador?
Check the Web sites or get a copy of a shortwave listener’s guide to find
English language programs. And, of course, music is always available and
requires no translation to enjoy.

Visiting a New Group
Drop in on a new club or net any time. They’ll be pleased you are visiting and
you may stumble into a whole new outlook on the hobby. I particularly enjoy
finding a club program on a subject I’m not acquainted with and making a
friend or two. Be sure to invite them to your meetings, as well!

307

308 Part V: The Part of Tens

Chapter 20

Ten Ways to Give Back
to Ham Radio
In This Chapter
 Tips for contributing to the ham radio community
 Preparing for emergencies
 Becoming an Elmer

H

am radio provides you with so many wonderful things to do and learn,
yet it is a service. The expectation is that beyond using ham radio just
for personal enjoyment, you contribute a little back to the public for use of
the airwaves. I show you ten ways to make a contribution in this chapter.

Preparing Yourself for Emergencies
The best thing you can do for emergency preparedness is to be sure you and
your family are ready. In an emergency, take care of home and family first. Only
then should you think of ham radio. If you’re not ready at home, you can’t pro­
vide assistance to others.

Preparing Your Community
for Emergencies
Find out what emergency groups are active in your community. The ARRL
Section Manager or District Emergency Coordinator is a good place to start
asking. If a group is active, join it. If no group exists, maybe you should con­
sider starting one.

310 Part V: The Part of Tens
Volunteering in Your Club
All clubs need individuals willing to put their shoulders to the wheel. Whether
you are limited to minor services or can volunteer for a leadership position,
your time and effort is welcomed. If you are a new member, you’ll find no
better way to become part of the family than to help out with a chore, no
matter how small.

Performing Public Service Assistance
Public service assistance is an easy and rewarding way to make a contribu­
tion. Start by asking the ARRL Section Manager if you can pitch in at a fun
run, parade, or sporting event. By lending a hand, you help everything run
more smoothly and learn a lot about emergency communications.

Experimenting
The Amateur Service is also intended to foster technical innovation in radio
technology and techniques. You don’t have to be a Nobel laureate to try out a
new antenna design, write a simple program, or experiment with propagation.
Also, telling others about your results is easier than you may think. Newsletters
and magazines love to help you spread the word.

Participating in On-the-Air Monitoring
The amateur bands are often hosts to unwanted intruders who take advan­
tage of the bands to avoid licensing fees or tests. The ARRL’s Intruder Watch
program needs your ears to help keep these freeloaders out. If you’d like to
assist ham radio’s self-policing nature, consider becoming an Official Observer.
NOAA’s SKYWARN program and numerous local weather nets depend on the
contributions of hams, as well.

Chapter 20: Ten Ways to Give Back to Ham Radio

Acting as a Product Tester
or QSL Manager
Hardware manufacturers and software authors often need testing assistance
from hams, the potential users of their products. Keep a watch for requests
for testers on Web sites and in Internet forums. Also, DX stations often need
help with replying to the many QSL requests they receive. Offering your ser­
vices as a manager furthers the sport of DX-ing and international goodwill.

Representing Amateur Radio
Write your government representatives on issues affecting ham radio. Don’t
limit yourself to state and federal issues. Many things happen on the local level,
such as zoning, planning, covenants, and permitting that could use your input.
Conversely, discovering planned actions that have an adverse affect on the ser­
vice can save us all a lot of trouble, if modified in time.

Being an Elmer
You’re a full-fledged ham now, so you can put on the Elmer hat and give a
hand to others just starting out. Being new to the hobby yourself, you are in
a great position to understand what a newcomer needs to know and what
seems confusing.

Making Lifelong Friendships
I would be omitting one of the most important aspects of building and main­
taining a vital and dynamic service if I did not mention the friendships that
hams form. They knit the hobby together and make it an enjoyable activity to
return to over the course of a lifetime. By enjoying each other’s company and
sharing in successes and failures, we build a community that grows stronger
with every new voice.

311

312 Part V: The Part of Tens

Part VI

Appendixes

I

In this part . . .

include two appendixes for use as handy references.
Appendix A includes a glossary of all the terms you
come across in Ham Radio For Dummies.

Appendix B is a collection of great books, articles, and
Web sites that you can use. You may want to add them to
your browser bookmarks list for even easier reference.
The reference texts make a great birthday or holiday gift,
don’t you think?

Appendix A

Glossary

T

his glossary is reprinted with the permission of the ARRL.

Amateur operator: A person holding a written authorization to be the control
operator of an amateur station.
Amateur service: A radio communication service for the purpose of selftraining, intercommunication, and technical investigations carried out by
amateurs, that is, duly authorized persons interested in radio technique
solely with a personal aim and without pecuniary interest.
Amateur station: A station licensed in the amateur service, including neces­
sary equipment, used for amateur communication.
Ammeter: A test instrument that measures current.
Ampere (A): The basic unit of electrical current. Current is a measure of the
electron flow through a circuit. If you count electrons, 6.24 × 1018 electrons
moving past a point in one second equal a current of one ampere. Abbreviated
as amps. (Numbers written as a multiple of some power are expressed in
exponential notation, as shown here.)
Amplitude modulation (AM): A method of combining an information signal
and an RF (radio-frequency) carrier. In voice AM transmission, the voice infor­
mation can vary (modulate) the amplitude of an RF carrier. Shortwave broad­
cast stations use this type of AM, as do stations in the Standard Broadcast
Band (535 to 1710 kHz). A variation of AM, known as single sideband, is very
popular.
Antenna: A device that picks up or sends out radio frequency energy.
Antenna switch: A switch that connects one transmitter, receiver, or trans­
ceiver to several different antennas.
Antenna tuner: A device that matches the antenna system input impedance
to the transmitter, receiver, or transceiver output impedance. Also called an
antenna-matching network, impedance-matching network, or Transmatch.

316 Part VI: Appendixes
Autopatch: A device that allows repeater users to make telephone calls through
a repeater.
Balun: Contraction for balanced to unbalanced. A device to couple a balanced
load to an unbalanced source, or vice versa.
Band spread: A receiver quality that describes how far apart stations on dif­
ferent nearby frequencies seem to be. Usually expressed as the number of
kilohertz that the frequency changes per tuning-knob rotation. The amount of
band spread determines how easily signals can be tuned.
Band-pass filter: A circuit that allows signals to go through it only if the sig­
nals are within a certain range of frequencies. It attenuates signals above and
below this range.
Bandwidth: The width of a frequency band outside of which the mean power is
attenuated at least 26dB below the mean power of the total emission, including
allowances for transmitter drift or Doppler shift. Bandwidth describes the
range of frequencies that a radio transmission occupies.
Battery: A device that converts chemical energy into electrical energy.
Beacon station: An amateur station transmitting communications for the
purposes of observation of propagation and reception or other related exper­
imental activities.
Beam antenna: A directional antenna. A beam antenna must be rotated to
provide its strongest coverage in different directions.
Beat-frequency oscillator (BFO): A receiver circuit that provides a signal to
the detector. The BFO signal mixes with the incoming signal to produce an
audio tone for CW reception. A BFO is needed to copy CW and SSB signals.
Broadcasting: Transmissions intended to be received by the general public,
either direct or relayed.
Capacitor: An electrical component usually formed by separating two con­
ductive plates with an insulating material. A capacitor stores energy in an
electric field.
Chirp: A slight shift in transmitter frequency each time you key the transmitter.
Closed repeater: A repeater that restricts access to those who know a special
code.
Coaxial cable (Coax): Pronounced kó-aks. A type of feedline with one conduc­
tor inside the other.

Appendix A: Glossary
Continuous wave (CW): Morse code telegraphy.
Control operator: An amateur operator designated by the licensee of a station
to be responsible for the transmissions of an amateur station.
Control point: The locations at which the control operator functions are
performed.
Courtesy tone: A tone or beep transmitted by a repeater to indicate that the
next station can begin transmitting. The courtesy tone is designed to allow a
pause between transmissions on a repeater, so other stations can call. It also
indicates that the time-out timer has been reset.
CQ: The general call when requesting a conversation with anyone — “Calling
any station.”
Crystal oscillator: A device that uses a quartz crystal to keep the frequency
of a transmitter constant.
Crystal-controlled transmitter: A simple type of transmitter that consists of a
crystal oscillator followed by driver and power amplifier stages.
CTCSS (Continuous Tone Coded Squelch System): A sub-audible tone system
used on some repeaters. When added to a carrier, a CTCSS tone allows a
receiver to accept a signal. Also called PL.
Cubical quad antenna: An antenna built with its elements in the shape of foursided loops.
Current: A flow of electrons in an electrical circuit.
CW (Morse code): A communications mode transmitted by on/off keying of a
radio-frequency signal. Another name for international Morse code.
D region: The lowest region of the ionosphere. The D region contributes very
little to shortwave radio propagation. It acts mainly to absorb energy from radio
waves as they pass through it. This absorption has a significant effect on sig­
nals below about 7.5 MHz during daylight.
Data: Computer-based communications modes, such as packet radio, which
can be used to transmit and receive computer files, or digital information.
DE: The Morse code abbreviation for “from” or “this is.”
Delta loop antenna: A variation of the cubical quad with triangular elements.
Digipeater: A packet-radio station used to retransmit signals that are specifi­
cally addressed to be retransmitted by that station.

317

318 Part VI: Appendixes
Digital communications: Computer-based communications modes. These
modes can include data modes, such as packet radio, and text-only modes
like radioteletype (RTTY).
Dipole antenna: See 1⁄ 2-wave dipole. A dipole not 1⁄ 2 wavelength long is called
a “doublet.”
Director: An element in front of the driven element in a Yagi antenna and some
other directional antennas.
Driven element: The part of an antenna that connects directly to the feedline.
Dual-band antenna: An antenna designed for use on two different Amateur
Radio bands.
Dummy antenna: A station accessory that allows you to test or adjust trans­
mitting equipment without sending a signal out over the air. Also called dummy
load.
Dummy load: See Dummy antenna.
Duplexer: A device that allows a dual-band radio to use a single dual-band
antenna.
Duty cycle: A measure of the amount of time a transmitter is operating at full
output power during a single transmission. A lower duty cycle means less RF
radiation exposure for the same PEP output.
DX: Distant, foreign countries.
E region: The second lowest ionospheric region, the E region exists only
during the day. Under certain conditions, it may refract radio waves enough
to return them to Earth.
Earth ground: A circuit connection to a ground rod driven into the Earth or
to a cold-water pipe made of copper that goes into the ground.
Earth station: An amateur station located on, or within 50 kilometers of,
the Earth’s surface intended for communications with space stations or with
other Earth stations by means of one or more other objects in space.
Earth-Moon-Earth (EME) or Moonbounce: A method of communicating with
other stations by reflecting radio signals off the moon’s surface.
Electron: A tiny, negatively charged particle, normally found in an area
surrounding the nucleus of an atom. Moving electrons make up an electrical
current.

Appendix A: Glossary
Emergency traffic: Messages with life and death urgency or requests for med­
ical help and supplies that leave an area shortly after an emergency.
Emission: The transmitted signal from an amateur station.
Emission privilege: The permission granted by your license to use a particular
emission type (such as Morse code or voice).
Emission types: Term for the different modes authorized for use on the Ama­
teur Radio bands. Examples are CW, SSB, RTTY, and FM.
F region: A combination of the two highest ionospheric regions, the F1 and
F2 regions. The F region refracts radio waves and returns them to Earth. Its
height varies greatly depending on the time of day, season of the year, and
amount of sunspot activity.
False or deceptive signals: Transmissions intended to mislead or confuse
those who may receive the transmissions. For example, transmitting distress
calls with no actual emergency are false or deceptive signals.
Feedline: The wires or cable used to connect a transmitter, receiver, or trans­
ceiver to an antenna. See Transmission line.
Filter: A circuit that allows some signals to pass through it but greatly reduces
the strength of others.
“Five-Nine”: A common signal report on voice that means “Your signal is strong
and easy to understand.” The equivalent on CW or Morse code is “599.” See also
Signal Report.
Frequency: The number of complete cycles of an alternating current that occur
per second.
Frequency bands: A group of frequencies where amateur communications are
authorized.
Frequency coordination: Allocating repeater input and output frequencies to
minimize interference between repeaters and to other users of the band.
Frequency coordinator: An individual or group that recommends repeater
frequencies to reduce or eliminate interference between repeaters operating
on or near the same frequency in the same geographical area.
Frequency discriminator: A type of detector used in some FM receivers.
Frequency modulated (FM) phone: The type of signals used to communicate
by voice (phone) over most repeaters. FM is a method of combining an RF car­
rier with an information signal, such as voice. The voice information (or data)

319

320 Part VI: Appendixes
changes the RF carrier frequency in the modulation process (see Amplitude
modulation). Voice or data vary the frequency of the transmitted signal. FM
broadcast stations and most professional communications (police, fire, taxi) use
FM. VHF/UHF FM voice is the most popular amateur mode.
Frequency privilege: The permission granted by your license to use a partic­
ular group of frequencies.
Front-end overload: Interference to a receiver caused by a strong signal that
overpowers the receiver RF amplifier (front end). See also receiver overload.
General-coverage receiver: A receiver used to listen to a wide range of fre­
quencies. Most general-coverage receivers tune from frequencies below the
standard-broadcast band to at least 30 MHz. These frequencies include the
shortwave-broadcast bands and the amateur bands from 160 to 10 meters.
Grace period: The time the FCC allows following the expiration of an amateur
license to renew the license without having to retake an examination. Hams
holding an expired license may not operate an amateur station until the license
is reinstated.
Ground connection: A connection made to the Earth for electrical safety. You
can make this connection inside (to a metal cold-water pipe) or outside (to a
ground rod).
Ground rod: A copper or copper-clad steel rod driven into the Earth. A
heavy copper wire from the ham shack connects all station equipment to the
ground rod.
Ground-wave propagation: The method by which radio waves travel along
the Earth’s surface.
Half-wave dipole: A basic antenna used by radio amateurs. It consists of a
length of wire or tubing, opened and fed at the center. The entire antenna is 1⁄ 2
wavelength long at the desired operating frequency.
Ham-bands-only receiver: A receiver designed to cover only the bands used
by amateurs. Usually refers to the bands from 80 to 10 meters, sometimes
including 160 meters.
Harmonics: Signals from a transmitter or oscillator occurring on wholenumber multiples (2_, 3_, 4_) of the desired operating frequency.
Health and Welfare traffic: Messages about the well being of individuals in a
disaster area. Such messages must wait for Emergency and Priority traffic to
clear, and results in advisories to those outside the disaster area awaiting
news from family and friends.

Appendix A: Glossary
Hertz (Hz): An alternating-current frequency of one cycle per second. The
basic unit of frequency.
High-pass filter: A filter designed to pass high-frequency signals, while block­
ing lower-frequency signals.
Impedance-matching device: See Antenna Tuner.
Input frequency: A repeater’s receiving frequency. To use a repeater, transmit
on the input frequency and receive on the output frequency.
Intermediate frequency (IF): The output frequency of a mixing stage in a
superheterodyne receiver. The subsequent stages in the receiver are tuned
for maximum efficiency at the IF.
Ionizing radiation: Electromagnetic radiation that has sufficient energy to
knock electrons free from their atoms, producing positive and negative ions.
X-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet radiation are examples of ionizing radiation.
Ionosphere: A region of electrically charged (ionized) gases high in the atmos­
phere. The ionosphere bends radio waves as they travel through it, returning
them to Earth. See also Sky-wave Propagation.
K: The Morse code abbreviation for “any station respond.”
Lightning protection: You can help prevent lightning damage to your equip­
ment (and your house) in several ways, among them unplugging equipment,
disconnecting antenna feedlines, and using a lightning arrestor.
Limiter: A stage of an FM receiver that makes the receiver less sensitive to
amplitude variations and pulse noise.
Line-of-sight propagation: The term used to describe VHF and UHF propaga­
tion in a straight line directly from one station to another.
Lower sideband (LSB): The common single-sideband operating mode on the
40, 80, and 160-meter amateur bands.
Low-pass filter: A filter that allows signals below the cutoff frequency to pass
through and attenuates signals above the cutoff frequency.
Malicious (harmful) interference: Intentional, deliberate obstruction of radio
transmissions.
Maximum useable frequency (MUF): The highest-frequency radio signal that
reaches a particular destination using sky-wave propagation, or skip. The MUF
may vary for radio signals sent to different destinations.

321

322 Part VI: Appendixes
MAYDAY: From the French m’aidez (help me), MAYDAY is used when calling
for emergency assistance in voice modes.
Microphone: A device that converts sound waves into electrical energy.
Mobile device: A radio transmitting device that you can mount in a vehicle. A
push-to-talk (PTT) switch activates the transmitter.
Modem: Short for modulator/demodulator. A modem modulates a radio signal to
transmit data and demodulates a received signal to recover transmitted data.
Modulate: To vary the amplitude, frequency, or phase of a radio-frequency
signal.
Modulation: The process of varying an RF carrier in some way (the amplitude
or the frequency, for example) to add an information signal to be transmitted.
Monitor mode: One type of packet radio receiving mode. In monitor mode,
everything transmitted on a packet frequency is displayed by the monitoring
TNC. The data is displayed whether or not the transmissions are addressed
to the monitoring station.
Morse code: See CW.
Multimode transceiver: Transceiver capable of SSB, CW, and FM operation.
National Electrical Code: A set of guidelines governing electrical safety,
including antennas.
Network: A term used to describe several packet stations linked together to
transmit data over long distances.
Nonionizing radiation: Electromagnetic radiation that does not have sufficient
energy to knock electrons free from their atoms. Radio frequency (RF) radia­
tion is nonionizing.
Offset: For CW operation, the 300 to 1000-Hz difference in transmitting and
receiving frequencies in a transceiver. For a repeater, offset refers to the dif­
ference between its transmitting and receiving frequencies.
One-way communications: Transmissions not intended to be answered. The
FCC strictly limits the types of one-way communications allowed on the ama­
teur bands.
Open repeater: A repeater used by all hams who have a license that authorizes
operation on the repeater frequencies.

Appendix A: Glossary
Operator/primary station license: An amateur license actually includes two
licenses in one. The operator license is that portion of an Amateur Radio
license that gives permission to operate an amateur station. The primary sta­
tion license is that portion of an Amateur Radio license that authorizes an
amateur station at a specific location. The station license also lists the call
sign of that station.
Output frequency: A repeater’s transmitting frequency. To use a repeater,
transmit on the input frequency and receive on the output frequency.
Packet radio: A system of digital communication whereby information is
broken into short bursts. The bursts (packets) also contain addressing and
error-detection information.
Parasitic beam antenna: See Beam Antenna.
Parasitic element: Part of a directive antenna that derives energy from mutual
coupling with the driven element. Parasitic elements are not connected directly
to the feedline.
Peak envelope power (PEP): The average power of a signal at its largest ampli­
tude peak.
Pecuniary: Payment of any type, whether money or other goods. Amateurs
may not operate their stations in return for any pecuniary.
Phone: Another name for voice communications.
Phone emission: The FCC name for voice or other sound transmissions.
Phonetic alphabet: Standard words used on voice modes, which make under­
standing letters of the alphabet easier, such as those in call signs. The call
sign KA6LMN stated phonetically is Kilo Alfa Six Lima Mike November.
PL: See CTCSS.
Polarization: The electrical-field characteristic of a radio wave. An antenna
parallel to the surface of the Earth, such as a dipole, produces horizontally
polarized waves. An antenna perpendicular to the Earth’s surface, such as a
1
⁄ 4-wave vertical, produces vertically polarized waves. An antenna with both
horizontal and vertical polarization is circularly polarized.
Portable device: A radio transmitting device designed to have a transmitting
antenna that is generally within 20 centimeters of a human body.
Priority traffic: Emergency-related messages, but not as important as Emer­
gency traffic.

323

324 Part VI: Appendixes
Procedural signal (prosign): One or two letters sent as a single character. Ama­
teurs use prosigns in CW contacts as a short way to indicate the operator’s
intention. Some examples are K for “Go Ahead,” or AR for “End of Message.”
Product detector: A device that allows a receiver to process CW and SSB
signals.
Propagation: The study of how radio waves travel.
Q signals: Three-letter symbols beginning with Q. Used on CW to save time
and to improve communication. Some examples are QRS (send slower), QTH
(location), QSO (ham conversation), and QSL (acknowledgment of receipt).
QRL?: Ham radio Q signal meaning “Is this frequency in use?”
QRP: Ham radio Q signal meaning “Low Power.” QRP generally means to 5
watts of transmitted power on CW or 10 watts of peak power on phone. QRPp
means power less than 1 watt.
QSL card: A postcard that serves as a confirmation of communication
between two hams.
QSO: A conversation between two radio amateurs.
Quarter-wavelength vertical antenna: An antenna constructed of a 1⁄ 4wavelength long radiating element placed perpendicular to the Earth.
Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES): A part of the Amateur
Service that provides radio communications for civil preparedness organiza­
tions during local, regional, or national civil emergencies.
Radio-frequency interference (RFI): Disturbance to electronic equipment
caused by radio-frequency signals.
Radioteletype (RTTY): Radio signals sent from one teleprinter machine to
another machine. Anything that one operator types on his teleprinter prints
on the other machine.
Receiver: A device that converts radio waves into signals you can hear or see.
Receiver incremental tuning (RIT): A transceiver control that allows for a
slight change in the receiver frequency without changing the transmitter fre­
quency. Some manufacturers call this control a clarifier (CLAR) control.
Receiver overload: Interference to a receiver caused by a strong RF signal
that forces its way into the equipment. A signal that overloads the receiver
RF amplifier (front end) causes front-end overload. Receiver overload is
sometimes called RF overload.

Appendix A: Glossary
Reflection: Signals that travel by line-of-sight propagation are reflected by
large objects, such as buildings.
Reflector: An element behind the driven element in a Yagi antenna and other
directional antennas.
Repeater station: An amateur station that automatically retransmits the signals
of other stations.
RF burn: A burn produced by coming in contact with exposed RF voltages.
RF carrier: A steady radio frequency signal that is modulated to add an infor­
mation signal to be transmitted. For example, a voice signal is added to the RF
carrier to produce a phone emission signal.
RF overload: Another term for receiver overload.
RF radiation: Waves of electric and magnetic energy. Such electromagnetic
radiation with frequencies as low as 3 kHz and as high as 300 GHz are consid­
ered part of the RF region.
RF safety: Preventing injury or illness to humans from the effects of radiofrequency energy.
Rig: The radio amateur’s term for a transmitter, receiver, or transceiver.
RST: A system of numbers used for signal reports: R is readability, S is strength,
and T is tone. (On single-sideband phones, only R and S reports are used.)
Selectivity: The ability of a receiver to separate two closely spaced signals.
Sensitivity: The ability of a receiver to detect weak signals.
73: Ham lingo for “best regards.” Used on both phone and CW toward the end
of a contact.
Shack: The room where an Amateur Radio operator keeps his or her station
equipment.
Sidebands: The sum or difference frequencies generated when an RF carrier
mixes with an audio signal. Single-sideband phone (SSB) signals have an upper
sideband (USB) and a lower sideband (LSB). SSB transceivers allow operation
on either USB or LSB. See also USB and LSB.
Signal report: A set of numbers that are exchanged to indicate the relative
quality of a signal’s quality in terms of strength, clarity, and purity (see RST).

325

326 Part VI: Appendixes
Simplex operation: Receiving and transmitting on the same frequency.
Single Sideband (SSB) phone: A common mode of voice operation on the ama­
teur bands. SSB is a form of amplitude modulation. The amplitude of the trans­
mitted signal varies with the voice signal variations.
Skip zone: An area of poor radio communication that is too distant for ground
waves and too close for sky waves.
Sky-wave propagation: The method radio waves travel through the ionosphere
and back to Earth. Sometimes called skip, sky-wave propagation has a far
greater range than line-of-sight and ground-wave propagation.
SOS: A Morse code call for emergency assistance.
Space station: An amateur station located more than 50 km above the Earth’s
surface.
Specific absorption rate (SAR): A term that describes the rate RF energy is
absorbed into the human body. Maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits
are based on whole-body SAR values.
Splatter: A type of interference to stations on nearby frequencies. Splatter
occurs when a transmitter is overmodulated.
Spurious emissions: Signals from a transmitter on frequencies other than the
operating frequency.
Standing-wave ratio (SWR): Sometimes called voltage standing-wave ratio
(VSWR). A measure of the impedance match between the feedline and the
antenna. Also, with a Transmatch in use, a measure of the match between the
feedline from the transmitter and the antenna system. The system includes
the Transmatch and the line to the antenna. VSWR is the ratio of maximum
voltage to minimum voltage along the feedline. Also the ratio of antenna
impedance to feedline impedance when the antenna is a purely resistive load.
Station grounding: Connecting all station equipment to a good Earth ground
improves both safety and station performance.
Sunspot cycle: The number of sunspots increases and decreases in a pre­
dictable cycle that lasts about 11 years.
Sunspots: Dark spots on the surface of the sun. With a few sunspots, longdistance radio propagation is poor on the higher-frequency bands. With
many sunspots, long-distance HF propagation improves.

Appendix A: Glossary
SWR meter: A measuring instrument that indicates when an antenna system
is working well. A device used to measure SWR (see Standing-wave ratio).
Tactical call signs: Names used to identify a location or function during local
emergency communications.
Teleprinter: A machine that can convert keystrokes (typing) into electrical
impulses. The teleprinter also converts the proper electrical impulses back
into text. Computers have largely replaced teleprinters for amateur radiotele­
type work.
Television interference (TVI): Interruption of television reception caused by
another signal.
Temperature inversion: A condition in the atmosphere in which a region of
cool air is trapped beneath warmer air.
Temporary state of communications emergency: When a disaster disrupts
normal communications in a particular area, the FCC can declare this type of
emergency. Certain rules may apply for the duration of the emergency.
Terminal: An inexpensive piece of equipment used in place of a computer in
a packet radio station.
Third-party communications: Messages passed from one amateur to another
on behalf of a third person.
Third-party communications agreement: An official understanding between
the United States and another country that allows amateurs in both countries
to participate in third-party communications.
Third-party participation: The way an unlicensed person can participate in
amateur communications. A control operator must ensure compliance with
FCC rules.
Ticket: A common name for an Amateur Radio license.
Time-out timer: A device that limits the amount of time any one person can
talk through a repeater.
Transceiver: A radio transmitter and receiver combined in one unit.
Transmission line: The wires or cable used to connect a transmitter or
receiver to an antenna. Also called a feedline.
Transmitter: A device that produces radio-frequency signals.

327

328 Part VI: Appendixes
Troposphere: The region in the Earth’s atmosphere just above the Earth’s
surface and below the ionosphere.
Tropospheric bending: When radio waves are bent in the troposphere, they
return to Earth farther away than the visible horizon.
Tropospheric ducting: A type of VHF propagation that occurs when warm air
overruns cold air (a temperature inversion).
Unbalanced line: A feedline with one conductor at ground potential, such as
a coaxial cable.
Uncontrolled environment: Any area in which an RF signal may cause radia­
tion exposure to people who may not be aware of the radiated electric and
magnetic fields. The FCC generally considers members of the general public
and an amateur’s neighbors to be in an uncontrolled RF radiation exposure
environment to determine the maximum permissible exposure levels.
Unidentified communications or signals: Signals or radio communications in
which the transmitting station’s call sign is not transmitted.
Upper sideband (USB): The common single-sideband operating mode on the
20, 17, 15, 12, and 10-meter HF amateur bands, and all the VHF and UHF bands.
Vertical antenna: A common amateur antenna, often made of metal tubing. The
radiating element is vertical. Usually four or more radial elements are parallel
to or on the ground.
VFO: Variable Frequency Oscillator — the circuit in a receiver or transmitter
that controls the operating frequency.
Visible horizon: The most distant point you see by line of sight.
Voice: Any of the several methods used by amateurs to transmit speech.
Voice communications: Hams can use several voice modes, including FM
and SSB.
Wavelength: Often abbreviated l. The distance a radio wave travels in one RF
cycle. The wavelength relates to frequency. Higher frequencies have shorter
wavelengths.
Yagi antenna: The most popular type of amateur directional (beam) antenna.
It has one driven element and one or more additional elements.

Appendix B

The Best References
In This Appendix
 Web sites
 Magazines
 Books
 Other resources

T

his appendix is a listing of many useful Web sites and books that can help
answer your many questions as you start your ham radio career. Most
ham radio books are available from the ARRL at www.arrl.org/catalog.
Where a book has a special publisher or other source, it’s noted with a Web
address where you can find it.

Web Portals
The Web portals referenced here are good “newsstands” for ham radio. On
these sites, you’ll find information about current and upcoming events, radio
conditions, and news stories. These sites also host mailing lists and forums
on various topics, equipment swap ’n shops, archived files and photos, and
product reviews. They are designed to be your ham radio home page.

eHam.net
This portal features news and articles, e-mail discussion groups, product
reviews, for sale listings, DX spotting and solar information, and surveys,
among other things.
www.eham.net

330 Part VI: Appendixes
QRZ.com
QRZ.com is a general interest portal and call sign/licensee lookup facility that
features extensive articles, news and discussion groups, and online practice
licensing exams.
www.qrz.com

K3TKS’ QSL.net
QSL.net is host to hundreds of individual and club ham radio Web pages and
e-mail reflectors. You can search the links and pages.
www.qsl.net

AC6V’s Amateur Radio and DX Reference Guide
This site offers many, many links and references covering all phases of ham
radio.
www.ac6v.com

Yahoo! Amateur and Ham Radio Directory
Here you can find links to a large number of general purpose and specialized
Web sites.
dir.yahoo.com/News_and_Media/Radio/Amateur_and_Ham_Radio

Buckmaster Publishing Hamcall
This site provides a worldwide call sign lookup service.
hamcall.net/call

Amateur Radio Webring
The Amateur Radio Webring is a list of many ham radio Web sites for clubs
and resource pages.
g.webring.com/hub?ring=amateurradio

Operating References
No one knows or remembers everything, so it’s a good idea to have references
on hand to guide your on-the-air activities. Here are some books you’ll find
handy on a day-to-day basis while operating.

Appendix B: The Best References
The FCC Rule Book
The rule book, published by the ARRL, explains in clear text what the regula­
tions mean and how you apply them. It also includes the actual text of the
Part 97 rules.

The ARRL Operating Manual
The operating guide, published by the ARRL, covers nearly all phases of ham
radio operating, including maps and numerous references.

On the Air with Ham Radio, by Steve Ford, WB8IMY
This book is a good introductory text to help you set up a station and get on
the air.

The ARRL Repeater Directory
Published by the ARRL, this directory lists North American repeaters on 10­
meters through the UHF and microwave bands.

Public service
After you start performing public service activities, you’ll need forms and train­
ing. Luckily, most of what you need is available online at the following sites.

ARRL Public Service Web page
This site includes several operating manuals available for free download,
guidelines and brochures, and links to other emergency communications
organizations.
www.arrl.org/FandES/field/pubservice.html

Amateur Radio Emergency Communications Courses: Level I, II, III
These online courses introduce the ham to “emcomm,” net control and man­
agement, and team management and planning. You may be reimbursed the
course tuition based on grant availability.
www.remote.arrl.org/cce/courses.html

Net Directory Search
You can use the online Net Directory Search to find on-the-air nets by fre­
quency, name and topic, or region.
www.arrl.org/FandES/field/nets/client/netsearch.html

331

332 Part VI: Appendixes
Digital modes
The online information available at these sites really helps you get going on
the digital modes. TAPR offers broad coverage of many different modes and
protocols. K1VY’s site focuses on PSK31, the most popular of the new digi­
tal modes.

Tucson Amateur Packet Radio (TAPR)
The TAPR is the biggest ham group specializing in digital modes. Its Web site
is a smorgasbord of information about all the popular digital protocols.
www.tapr.org

PSK31
Neil Rosenberg K1VY put together a comprehensive site on PSK31. You find
quite a few descriptive articles and construction projects, as well as links to
other digital data sites.
psk31.com

DX-ing resources
Successful DX-ing takes timely information about which stations are active
and what conditions you can expect on the air. The following references are
DX-ing magazines, newsletters, and bulletins containing information about
currently active and upcoming DX events:
 DX Magazine (www.dxpub.com/dx_mag.html): This bimonthly peri­
odical contains articles about the techniques of DX-ing and includes
numerous travelogues of “DX-peditions” to interesting places around
the world.
 QRZ DX (www.dxpub.com/qrz_dx_nl.html): QRZ DX is a weekly print
or e-mail newsletter with DX-ing news, a substantial listing of IOTA activ­
ity (island-based activity), and a listing of frequencies on which soughtafter stations have been heard.
 Daily DX (www.dailydx.com): Daily DX covers news and activity as a
daily e-mail newsletter full of late-breaking news and on-the-air surprises.
 The OPDX Bulletin (www.papays.com/opdx.html) and ARRL DX
Bulletin (www.arrl.org/w1aw/dx): These are free weekly e-mail bul­
letins containing a compendium of current and anticipated DX station
activities.

Appendix B: The Best References
The Complete DXer, by Bob Locher W9KNI
This book should be read by every budding DXer to learn the basics of DX­
ing and good operating. In a wonderfully readable short-story format, Bob
explains the right ways to go about putting DX call signs in your log. If you’re
mystified by what you hear while chasing DX, W9KNI has been there and
helps you understand the whys and hows. The book is available from Idiom
Press at www.idiompress.com.

DXsummit.com
DXsummit.com is a worldwide DX spotting Web site where hams post reports
on every band from every land 24 hours a day. The reports, known as spots,
are searchable by call and band. The site also records solar data for propaga­
tion information.
www.dxsummit.com

Passport to World Band Radio
Published by International Broadcasting Services, this reference guide is for
shortwave broadcast listeners, now in its 20th edition.
Also, these Web sites can help you find out where to send your QSL card to
confirm contacts with DX stations:
 K4UTE: www.nfdxa.com/K4UTE/K4UTE.HTML
 IK3QAR: www.ik3qar.it/manager/

Contesting
Contesting activity occurs every weekend, so if you want to join in, you’ll
need to have a good event calendar at your fingertips. As you learn to enjoy
the sport of contesting, you’ll want to learn about operating techniques and
how the “regulars” make those big scores. Here are some resources that can
speed your journey from “Little Pistol” to “Big Gun.”

Contesting.com
Contesting.com is a Web portal that specializes in contesting and hosts sev­
eral e-mail reflectors.
www.contesting.com

333

334 Part VI: Appendixes
National Contest Journal
A bimonthly magazine published by the ARRL, National Contest Journal
includes contest results and articles about contests and interviews. The NCJ
also sponsors several popular contests.
www.ncjweb.com

Contester’s Rate Sheet
This biweekly e-mail newsletter lists upcoming contests and contesting news,
and covers technical topics and product release information. It’s free to ARRL
members.
www.arrl.org/contests/rate-sheet/about.html

And try these sites if you’re looking for contest calendars with listings of
upcoming events:
 ARRL Contest Corral: www.arrl.org/contests
 By Bruce Horn WA7BNM: www.hornucopia.com/contestcal
 By Jan-Eric Rehn SM3CER: www.sk3bg.se/contest
 Mike Sivecic VK4DX: www.vk4dx.net

Satellites
To contact any of the satellites whizzing around “up there,” you need timely information about their status and orbitals.
 Getting started isn’t nearly as difficult as you might think, especially if you can rely on the good how-to ref­rences listed here. 
The books are available through AMSAT or the ARRL.

Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation (AMSAT) Web site
This site provides the latest information on satellite status and links to useful
information about satellite operating.
amsat.org/

Getting Started With Amateur Satellites, by G. Gould Smith WA4SXM
This book shows the beginner how to get started on satellites. It explains the
necessary astronomical terminology, shows you how to locate the satellite
and how to set up a satellite-capable station with inexpensive equipment.

The Radio Amateur’s Satellite Handbook, by Martin Davidoff K2UBC
This handbook offers detailed information about all aspects of satellite
operation.

Appendix B: The Best References
The AMSAT-NA Digital Satellite Guide, published by AMSAT
This book provides step-by-step information about using the digital PACSATs.

Mobile operation
Do you prefer to do your hamming on the go? Here are some resources to
answer all your questions about mobile operation:

Your Mobile Companion, by Roger Burch WF4N
An ARRL publication, this book provides an introduction to mobile operating,
including how to set up the mobile station and operating guidelines.

The Mobile DXer, by Dave Mangels AC6WO
AC6WO’s book shows how to do high-performance operating on the road,
including tips on how to compete with the home stations. It is available from
CQ Communications at www.cq-amateur-radio.com.

APRS Tracks, Maps and Mobiles - A Guide to the Automatic
Position Reporting System, by Stan Horzepa WA1LOU
This guide, published by the ARRL, provides detailed information about how
to set up your equipment to use APRS and use the Internet-based positionviewing software.

Technical References
Ham radio involves a lot of different technologies, and to perform at optimum
level, you need to know as much as you can about all of them. The following
sections detail some of the best resources for many different ham-related
technologies.

General
Ham radio being the techie hobby that it is, you’ll have more success if you
can access technical references on a regular basis. Start with The ARRL
Handbook and keep the Web links in your browser bookmark file.

The ARRL Handbook
Published by the ARRL, and now in its 81st edition, the handbook is a must
for every shack. It’s an encyclopedia of the technical aspects of amateur
radio and includes numerous construction projects.



Amateur radio, also known as ham radio, is the use of the radio spectrum for non-commercial communication, technical experimentation, self-training, recreation, radiosport, contesting, and emergency communications.[1] A surge of popular interest in radio experimentation in the early 20th century necessitated radio spectrum to be allocated to non-professionals. In 1927 a radio amateur was defined as "a duly authorized person interested in radioelectric practice with a purely personal aim and without pecuniary interest," meaning without monetary or similar reward. The definition distinguished amateur activity from commercial broadcasting, public safety services, and professional two-way radio uses such as maritime, aviation, and taxi communication.[2]
Polish amateur radio station SP1QE with a 1930s vacuum tube transmitter and receiver

The amateur radio service (amateur service and amateur-satellite service) is established by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) through its Radio Regulations. National governments set technical and operational rules for transmissions and issue individual station licences with unique call signs. Call signs must be used in transmissions, at least every ten minutes and at the end. Amateur radio operators must hold an amateur radio licence, granted after an examination that tests knowledge of radio theory, electronics, and national regulations.

Operators are authorised to transmit on frequency ranges allocated internationally as the amateur radio bands. Within these bands they may use any frequency, though some are restricted to particular modes of voice, text, image, or data communications. This allows communication locally, nationally, worldwide, and even with stations in space. In many countries, operators may also exchange radio communications between computers or transceivers connected through virtual private networks on the Internet.

Amateur radio is represented by the International Amateur Radio Union (IARU), which has three regions and includes national amateur radio societies in most countries. In 2011 the American Radio Relay League (the U.S. national society) estimated that about 2 million people worldwide were active in amateur radio.[3] About 830,000 amateur radio stations are in Region 2 (the Americas), about 750,000 in Region 3 (South and East Asia and the Pacific), and about 400,000 in Region 1 (Europe, the Middle East, the CIS and Africa). Radio amateurs have been credited with a number of advancements, notably the discovery of skywave propagation.
History
Main article: History of amateur radio
An amateur radio station in Wales. Multiple transceivers are employed for different bands and modes. Computers are used for control, data modes, SDR, RTTY and logging.

The origins of amateur radio can be traced to the late 19th century, but amateur radio as practised today began in the early 20th century. The First Annual Official Wireless Blue Book of the Wireless Association of America, produced in 1909, contains a list of amateur radio stations.[4] This radio callbook lists wireless telegraph stations in Canada and the United States, including 89 amateur radio stations. As with radio in general, amateur radio was associated with various amateur experimenters and hobbyists. Amateur radio enthusiasts have significantly contributed to science, engineering, industry, and social services. Research by amateur operators has founded new industries, like experimentation with quartz piezoelectric resonators from 1924 until about 1934[5] built economies,[6] empowered nations,[7] and saved lives in times of emergency.[8][9] Ham radio can also be used in the classroom to teach English, map skills, geography, math, science, and computer skills.[10]
Ham radio
Main article: Etymology of ham radio

The term "ham" was first a pejorative term used in professional wired telegraphy during the 19th century, to mock operators with poor Morse code-sending skills ("ham-fisted").[11][12][13][14] This term continued to be used after the invention of radio, and the proliferation of amateur experimentation with wireless telegraphy; among land- and sea-based professional radio telegraphers, "ham" amateurs were considered a nuisance. The use of "ham" meaning "amateurish or unskilled" survives today sparsely in other disciplines (e.g. "ham actor").

The amateur radio community subsequently reclaimed the word as a label of pride,[15] and by the mid-20th century it had lost its pejorative meaning. Although not an acronym or initialism, it is occasionally written as "HAM" in capital letters.
Activity and practice

Amateur radio combines communication, technical experimentation, and recreation. Operators take part in contests, provide emergency service, build and modify equipment, and use transmission modes ranging from traditional Morse code to modern digital protocols.
Amateur operator with antennas in Åland
Community and social use
Backyard amateur radio antenna farm

Operators often join conversational groups and take part in scheduled on-air meetings called nets, coordinated by a net control station.[16] Nets may provide training for emergencies, operate as informal discussions, or focus on specialised topics.[17]

With battery- or generator-powered equipment, operators frequently provide communication during natural disasters when commercial services are unavailable.[18]

Competitive activities include contests to contact as many stations as possible in a set period, and operating awards such as Summits on the Air, Worked All States, and Jamboree on the Air. Operators also contribute to citizen science by collecting propagation data and supporting atmospheric science research.[19]
Voice and Morse code

The principal voice modes are frequency modulation (FM), single sideband (SSB), and amplitude modulation (AM). FM offers high audio quality, SSB is efficient for long-distance use,[20] and AM continues among users of vintage amateur radio equipment.

Radiotelegraphy using International Morse code, or continuous wave (CW), is one of the oldest modes in amateur radio. Although largely replaced in professional services, it remains in use on shortwave bands because it functions under weak-signal conditions and employs internationally understood codes such as the Q code. CW is also used by hobbyists who build their own equipment (home construction) and by operators engaged in low-power operation, as CW transmitters are simple to construct and weak signals can often be received by ear.

Until 2003, Morse code proficiency was required under international regulations for access to frequencies below 30 MHz.[21] The requirement was withdrawn in the United States in 2007.[22][23][A]
Digital and computer-assisted modes

Personal computers have enabled new digital transmission modes. Radioteletype (RTTY), once operated by mechanical devices,[24] is now handled in software. Packet radio, developed in the 1970s, uses protocols such as AX.25 and TCP/IP. Later modes including PSK31 and FT8 allow efficient low-signal communication on shortwave bands.

Radio over IP (RoIP) applies Internet-based telephony techniques to radio. EchoLink and the Internet Radio Linking Project link repeaters and operators worldwide.[25]

Other specialised modes support weak-signal communication. Automatic link establishment (ALE) maintains networks on high frequency bands, while the WSJT suite supports meteor scatter and moonbounce.[26]
Television and repeater systems

Fast-scan amateur television (ATV) adapts consumer video equipment to transmit images. It typically operates on the 70 cm (420–450 MHz) but may also use the 33 cm and higher frequencies. Because of wide bandwidth requirements, ATV usually covers 30–100 km (20–60 mi). Linked repeater systems extend this range to several hundred kilometres.[27] Repeaters are often located on high ground or towers and may be linked by other amateur bands, landlines, or the Internet.
Space and atmospheric propagation
NASA astronaut Doug Wheelock using amateur radio aboard the International Space Station

Operators can use amateur radio satellites, sometimes with only a hand-held transceiver.[28] Natural reflectors such as the Moon, the aurora borealis, and meteor trails are also used.[29] Licensed astronauts have also made contacts from the International Space Station through the ARISS programme.[30][31]
Licensing

Because radio signals can propagate across national borders, amateur radio is regulated by governments under international frameworks.[32] National requirements generally follow standards set by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)[33] and World Radiocommunication Conferences.

Most countries require candidates to pass an examination that tests electronics, radio propagation, operating practices, and regulations.[34] Licensing grants access to a broader portion of the spectrum, additional communication modes, and higher transmitter power than unlicensed personal radio services such as CB, FRS, or PMR446.[35]
The top of a tower supporting a Yagi–Uda antenna and several wire antennas, along with a Canadian flag

Examination systems often include several levels, each granting wider frequency access and higher power limits.[36][37] In the United Kingdom and Australia, entry-level candidates must also complete a practical skills test to obtain the Foundation Licence, the first of three licensing stages.[38]

Each licensee is normally assigned a unique call sign.[39] Some countries issue additional station licences, or recognise club and organisational licences.[40]
A handheld VHF/UHF transceiver

Licences are generally valid only in the issuing country or in states with reciprocal agreements.[41][42] In some jurisdictions, a licence is also required to purchase or possess amateur radio equipment.[43]

In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) issues three licence classes: Technician, General, and Amateur Extra.[44] Examinations are administered by accredited Volunteer Examiners through the FCC's Volunteer Examiner Coordinator system. Higher licence classes provide access to more frequency bands and higher transmitter power. The tests cover regulations, operating practices, electronics theory, equipment design, and safety. Morse code is no longer tested. Licences are valid for ten years, and the national question pools are published in advance and updated every four years.[44]
Licensing requirements

Prospective amateur radio operators are examined on understanding of the key concepts of electronics, radio equipment, antennas, radio propagation, RF safety, and the radio regulations of the government granting the license.[1] These examinations are sets of questions typically posed in either a short answer or multiple-choice format. Examinations can be administered by bureaucrats, non-paid certified examiners, or previously licensed amateur radio operators.[1]

The ease with which an individual can acquire an amateur radio license varies from country to country. In some countries, examinations may be offered only once or twice a year in the national capital and can be inordinately bureaucratic (for example in India) or challenging because some amateurs must undergo difficult security approval (as in Iran). Currently, only Yemen and North Korea do not issue amateur radio licenses to their citizens.[45][46] Some developing countries, especially those in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, require the payment of annual license fees that can be prohibitively expensive for most of their citizens. A few small countries may not have a national licensing process and may instead require prospective amateur radio operators to take the licensing examinations of a foreign country. In countries with the largest numbers of amateur radio licensees, such as Japan, the United States, Thailand, Canada, and most of the countries in Europe, there are frequent license examinations opportunities in major cities.

Granting a separate license to a club or organization generally requires that an individual with a current and valid amateur radio license who is in good standing with the telecommunications authority assumes responsibility for any operations conducted under the club license or club call sign.[47] A few countries may issue special licenses to novices or beginners that do not assign the individual a call sign but instead require the newly licensed individual to operate from stations licensed to a club or organization for a period of time before a higher class of license can be acquired.[1]
Reciprocal licensing
Further information: Amateur radio international operation
World map showing reciprocal licensing agreements for amateur radio
Map of amateur radio reciprocal licensing agreements.   CEPT members   IARP members   CEPT and IARP   USA–Canada treaty, CEPT, and IARP

A reciprocal licensing agreement between two countries allows licensed amateur radio operators from one country to operate stations in the other without obtaining a new licence. In some cases, visiting operators may be issued a temporary local licence and call sign.

Requirements vary by jurisdiction. Some countries have bilateral or multilateral agreements that harmonise conditions, while others have no reciprocal arrangements. Regional organisations, such as the Organization of American States, facilitate reciprocity through treaties, including the Inter-American Amateur Radio Service Convention.[48]
Newcomers

Many people start their involvement in amateur radio on social media or by finding a local club. Clubs often provide information about licensing, local operating practices, and technical advice. Newcomers also often study independently by purchasing books or other materials, sometimes with the help of a mentor, teacher, or friend. In North America, established amateurs who help newcomers are often referred to as "Elmers", as coined by Rodney Newkirk (W9BRD),[49] within the ham community.[50][51] In addition, many countries have national amateur radio societies which encourage newcomers and work with government communications regulation authorities for the benefit of all radio amateurs. The oldest of these societies is the Wireless Institute of Australia, formed in 1910; other notable societies are the Radio Society of Great Britain, the American Radio Relay League, Radio Amateurs of Canada, Bangladesh NGOs Network for Radio and Communication, the New Zealand Association of Radio Transmitters and South African Radio League. (See Category:Amateur radio organizations)
Call signs
Further information: Amateur radio call signs

An amateur radio operator uses a call sign on the air to legally identify the operator or station.[52] In some countries, the call sign assigned to the station must always be used, whereas in other countries, the call sign of either the operator or the station may be used.[53] In certain jurisdictions, an operator may also select a "vanity" call sign although these must also conform to the issuing government's allocation and structure used for amateur radio call signs.[54] Some jurisdictions require a fee to obtain a vanity call sign; in others, such as the UK, a fee is not required and the vanity call sign may be selected when the license is applied for. The FCC in the U.S. discontinued its fee for vanity call sign applications in September 2015, but reinstated it at $35 in 2022.[55]

Call sign structure as prescribed by the ITU consists of three parts which break down as follows, using the call sign ZS1NAT as an example:

    ZS 	The first part may be one or two letters (or a single digit followed by a single letter); it shows the country from which the call sign originates and may also indicate the license class. (This call sign is licensed in South Africa.)
    1 	The second part is always a single digit that appears as the second or third character, and always follows a letter; it normally gives the subdivision of the country or territory indicated in the first part (this one refers to the Western Cape).
    NAT 	The third part is a set of one, two, or three letters that immediately follows the digit in the second part (the digit in the second or third character); it uniquely identifies the holder of the license. (In the examples below, the third part is represented by "xxx".) 

The combination of the three parts identifies the specific transmitting station, and the station's identification (its call sign) is determined by the license held by its operator. In the case of commercial stations and amateur club stations, the operator is a corporation; in the case of amateur radio operators, the license-holder is a resident of the country identified by the first part of the call sign.

Many countries do not follow the ITU convention for the second-part digit. In the United Kingdom the original calls G0xxx, G2xxx, G3xxx, G4xxx, were Full (A) License holders along with the last M0xxx full call signs issued by the City & Guilds examination authority in December 2003. Additional Full Licenses were originally granted to (B) Licenses with G1xxx, G6xxx, G7xxx, G8xxx and 1991 onward with M1xxx call signs. The newer three-level Intermediate License holders are assigned 2E0xxx and 2E1xxx, and the basic Foundation License holders are granted call signs M3xxx, M6xxx or M7xxx.[56]

Instead of using numbers, in the U.K. the second letter after the initial 'G' or 'M' identifies the station's location; for example, a call sign G7OOE becomes GM7OOE and M0RDM becomes MM0RDM when the license holder is operating their station in Scotland. Prefix GM & MM are Scotland, GW & MW are Wales, GI & MI are Northern Ireland, GD & MD are the Isle of Man, GJ & MJ are Jersey and GU & MU are Guernsey. Intermediate licence call signs are slightly different. They begin 2z0 and 2z1 where the z is replaced with one of the country letters, as above. For example 2M0 and 2M1 are Scotland, 2W0 and 2W1 are Wales and so on. The exception however is for England, whose letter would be 'E'; however, letter 'E' is used, but only in intermediate-level call signs, and perplexingly never by the advanced licenses. For example 2E0 & 2E1 are used whereas the call signs beginning 'G' or 'M' for foundation and full licenses never use the 'E'.[57]

In the United States, for non-vanity licenses, the numeral indicates the geographical district the holder resided in when the license was first issued. Prior to 1978, US hams were required to obtain a new call sign if they moved out of their geographic district.

In Canada, call signs start with VA, VE, VY, VO, and CY. Call signs starting with 'V' end with a number after to indicate the political region; whereas the prefix CY indicates geographic islands. Prefixes VA1 and VE1 are used for Nova Scotia; VA2 & VE2 for Quebec; VA3 & VE3 for Ontario; VA4 & VE4 for Manitoba; VA5 & VE5 for Saskatchewan; VA6 & VE6 for Alberta; VA7 & VE7 for British Columbia; VE8 for the Northwest Territories; VE9 for New Brunswick; VY0 for Nunavut; VY1 for the Yukon; VY2 for Prince Edward Island; VO1 for Newfoundland; and VO2 for Labrador. CY is for amateurs operating from Sable Island (CY0) or St. Paul Island (CY9). Special permission is required to access either of these: from Parks Canada for Sable and Coast Guard for St. Paul. The last two or three letters of the call signs are typically the operator's choice (upon completing the licensing test, the ham writes three most-preferred options). Two-letter call sign suffixes require a ham to have already been licensed for 5 years. Call signs in Canada can be requested with a fee.

Also, for smaller geopolitical entities, the digit at the second or third character might be part of the country identification. For example, VP2xxx is in the British West Indies, which is subdivided into VP2Exx Anguilla, VP2Mxx Montserrat, and VP2Vxx British Virgin Islands. VP5xxx is in the Turks and Caicos Islands, VP6xxx is on Pitcairn Island, VP8xxx is in the Falklands, and VP9xxx is in Bermuda.

Online callbooks or call sign databases can be browsed or searched to find out who holds a specific call sign.[58] An example of an online callbook is QRZ.com. Various partial lists of famous people who hold or held amateur radio call signs have been compiled and published.[59]

Many jurisdictions (but not in the U.K. nor Europe) may issue specialty vehicle registration plates to licensed amateur radio operators.[60][61] The fees for application and renewal are usually less than the standard rate for specialty plates.[60][62]
Privileges

In most administrations, unlike other RF spectrum users, radio amateurs may build or modify transmitting equipment for their own use within the amateur spectrum without the need to obtain government certification of the equipment.[63][a][64][b] Licensed amateurs can also use any frequency in their bands (rather than being allocated fixed frequencies or channels) and can operate medium-to-high-powered equipment on a wide range of frequencies[65] so long as they meet certain technical parameters including occupied bandwidth, power, and prevention of spurious emission.

Radio amateurs have access to frequency allocations throughout the RF spectrum, usually allowing choice of an effective frequency for communications across a local, regional, or worldwide path. The shortwave bands, or HF, are suitable for worldwide communication, and the VHF and UHF bands normally provide local or regional communication, while the microwave bands have enough space, or bandwidth, for amateur television transmissions and high-speed computer networks.
The international symbol for amateur radio, is included in the logos of many IARU member societies. The diamond holds a circuit diagram featuring components common to every radio: an antenna, inductor and ground.

In most countries, an amateur radio license grants permission to the license holder to own, modify, and operate equipment that is not certified by a governmental regulatory agency. This encourages amateur radio operators to experiment with home-constructed or modified equipment. The use of such equipment must still satisfy national and international standards on spurious emissions.

Amateur radio operators are encouraged both by regulations and tradition of respectful use of the spectrum to use as little power as possible to accomplish the communication.[66] This is to minimise interference or electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) to any other device. Although allowable power levels are moderate by commercial standards, they are sufficient to enable global communication. Lower license classes usually have lower power limits; for example, the lowest license class in the UK (Foundation licence) has a limit of 25 W.[67]

Power limits vary from country to country and between license classes within a country. For example, the peak envelope power limits for the highest available license classes in a few selected countries are: 2.25 kW in Canada;[68] 1.5 kW in the United States; 1.0 kW in Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand; 750 W in Germany; 500 W in Italy; 400 W in Australia and India; and 150 W in Oman.

Output power limits may also depend on the mode of transmission. In Australia, for example, 400 W may be used for SSB transmissions, but FM and other modes are limited to 120 W.

The point at which power output is measured may also affect transmissions: The United Kingdom measures at the point the antenna is connected to the signal feed cable, which means the radio system may transmit more than 400 W to overcome signal loss in the cable; conversely, the U.S. and Germany measure power at the output of the final amplification stage, which results in a loss in radiated power with longer cable feeds.[citation needed]

Certain countries permit amateur radio licence holders to hold a Notice of Variation that allows higher power to be used than normally allowed for certain specific purposes. E.g. in the UK some amateur radio licence holders are allowed to transmit using (33 dBw) 2.0 kW for experiments entailing using the moon as a passive radio reflector (known as Earth–Moon–Earth communication) (EME).
Band plans and frequency allocations
Main article: Amateur radio frequency allocations

The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) governs the allocation of communications frequencies worldwide, with participation by each nation's communications regulation authority. National communications regulators have some liberty to restrict access to these bandplan frequencies or to award additional allocations as long as radio services in other countries do not suffer interference. In some countries, specific emission types are restricted to certain parts of the radio spectrum, and in most other countries, International Amateur Radio Union (IARU) member societies adopt voluntary plans to ensure the most effective use of spectrum.

In a few cases, a national telecommunication agency may also allow hams to use frequencies outside of the internationally allocated amateur radio bands. In Trinidad and Tobago, hams are allowed to use a repeater which is located on 148.800 MHz. This repeater is used and maintained by the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), but may be used by radio amateurs in times of emergency or during normal times to test their capability and conduct emergency drills. This repeater can also be used by non-ham NEMA staff and REACT members. In Australia and New Zealand, ham operators are authorized to use one of the UHF TV channels. In the U.S., amateur radio operators providing essential communication needs in connection with the immediate safety of human life and immediate protection of property when normal communication systems are not available may use any frequency including those of other radio services such as police and fire and in cases of disaster in Alaska may use the statewide emergency frequency of 5.1675 MHz with restrictions upon emissions.[69]

Similarly, amateurs in the United States may apply to be registered with the Military Auxiliary Radio System (MARS). Once approved and trained, these amateurs also operate on US government military frequencies to provide contingency communications and morale message traffic support to the military services.

    vte

International amateur radio frequency allocations[t1]
				
		
		
		
				
	
			
	
	
	
	
	
	
			
	
	
		
		
		
			
			
			
	
	
			
			
	
	
		
		
	
	
	
		
	
	
	
	
Modes of communication
See also: List of amateur radio modes

Amateurs use a variety of voice, text, image, and data communication modes over radio. Generally new modes can be tested in the amateur radio service, although national regulations may require disclosure of a new mode to permit radio licensing authorities to monitor the transmissions. Encryption, for example, is not generally permitted in the Amateur Radio service except for the special purpose of satellite vehicle control uplinks.[citation needed] The following is a partial list of the modes of communication used, where the mode includes both modulation types and operating protocols.
Voice

    Amplitude modulation (AM)
    Amplitude modulation equivalent (AME)
    Double sideband, suppressed carrier (DSB-SC)
    Frequency modulation (FM)
    Independent sideband (ISB)
    Single sideband (SSB)
    Phase modulation (PM)

Image

    Amateur television (ATV), also known as fast scan television[70]
    Radiofax
    Slow-scan television (SSTV)[71]

Text and data

In former times, most amateur digital modes were transmitted by inserting audio into the microphone input of a radio and using an analog scheme, such as amplitude modulation (AM), frequency modulation (FM), or single-sideband modulation (SSB). Beginning in 2017, increased use of several digital modes, particularly FT8, became popular within the amateur radio community.[72]

Text-modes

    Continuous wave (CW), usually used for Morse code
    Automatic link establishment (ALE)
    Amateur teleprinting over radio (AMTOR)[73]
    PACTOR[74][75]
    Radioteletype (RTTY)
    Hellschreiber, a.k.a. Feld-Hell or Hell

Digital modes


    Digital mobile radio(DMR)[78]
    Fusion (Yaesu proprietary mode)[79]
    Discrete multi-tone modulation modes such as Multi Tone 63 (MT63)[81]
    Multiple frequency-shift keying (MFSK)[82] modes:
        JS8Call
        Olivia MFSK[83][84]
        WSJT[85] software modes:
            FSK441, JT6M, JT65, JT9, FT8, FT4
        WSPR
    Packet radio[86] (AX.25)
        Automatic Packet Reporting System (APRS)[87]
    Phase-Shift Keying
        31-baud BPSK (binary phase shift keying) PSK31[88]
        31-baud QPSK (quadrature phase shift keying) QPSK31
        63-baud BPSK (binary phase shift keying) PSK63
        63-baud QPSK (quadrature phase shift keying) QPSK63

Modes by activity

The following "modes" use no one specific modulation scheme but rather are classified by the activity of the communication.

    AllStarLink (AllStar / ASL)[89]
    Earth-Moon-Earth (EME)
    EchoLink[90]
    Internet Radio Linking Project (IRLP)[91]
    Low transmit power (QRP)[92]
    Satellite (OSCAR – orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio)[93]






noah can not use grok.
noah cannot use bot.
@grok antenna.
swr is high on my antenna for some reason.
@grok antenna.
@grok antenna.
transistor biased correctly.
@grok antenna.
@grok antenna.
I need to put up my antenna for 80m after I go to the radio club meeting.
noah uses a very bad radio.